# All New Video Game Ideas  
**By Adam J. Capps**  
*A Public Domain Book*  

"It's A Secret To Everybody."  
*-The Legend of Zelda-*    

## Introduction  

This will be a book of all new video game ideas. Anyone may freely use them. They'll touch upon just about everything. I'll split them up into genres so you can find things much easier. Whatever genre of game you are working on just look up the section for it here. I've written lots of books going 5 or more pages a day. I have worked on things like this, getting maybe 3 pages done a day. The purpose of this book is to help people make a good video game. By proxy, I would then be part of the whole thing. I always wanted to create a game on my own but this is the best I can do. Some of this is "food for thought." That can actually be more helpful than anything else. My experience is there. I have been watching videos about video games for nearly ten years. It is my favorite source of entertainment : videos of all kinds about video games (top tens, reviews, "evolution of," "history of," playthroughs, speed runs, you name it.) Unless I felt like the idea was new and worth including, I didn't include it.  
This book goes over different genres with the popular genres given more ideas. There are over 500 ideas here in total. I touch upon a few other things at the end such as an "Idea Thesaurus." Just for fun I also go over the early history of video games and speculate where they might be going. This is a free use public domain book. If you want to add to it yourself creating a new edition, selling that edition exclusively, then you can. You can share this, you can sell this, you can change this, you can use this. So with nothing more to say here is my book of new ideas :  

## Adventure Games  

1. An imp in a jar, like the jars you break with a sword, giving you things then disappearing.  
2. Different kinds of bottles with different things inside. When you throw and break the bottle certain things happen (other than those ideas that have already been used such as bees in Zelda.)  
3. If you are right in the middle of a dungeon and need a certain something (like extra health, arrows) then you can do a skill based thing in a special room to get it.  
4. After you beat a dungeon a special room opens up that you can always come back to. That room gives you certain things or can just be a strange fishing spot or maybe it charges a type of magic. Maybe the new occupants are helpful to you. But it is not a dead area with nothing there after you've beaten its boss.  
5. When you burn a certain tree/bush, then the smoke it creates causes a magical effect. Maybe it brings the forest alive or transforms something.  
6. You have an air/smoke catching net. You take the magical air from place to place and capture it in a bottle for a magical effect. Maybe you can capture souls too, like from monsters.  
7. You eat food in the game to boost stats and if you want to increase the effect you use magical spices- some of which are very difficult to cull. You could, maybe, have crushed crystal stones if you are willing to sacrifice its monetary value.  
8. Different color coins have their own value but those that sparkle are worth twice as much. Then, once in a blue moon, they sparkle much more than usual.  
9. During the dungeon you get the master key. But you have an option to use that key elsewhere. You never know where that is going to be but once you use it you get some really nice things. Only you have to go back through the dungeon to get that key again. You can't simply return through the front door with it.  
10. The whole point of a dungeon is to get a magic key. The puzzle isn't so much over after you beat dungeons. You have to use the keys you've gotten to unlock hidden things, in beating the game. Maybe there is a master dungeon to free person after person in getting those keys.  
11. Having a large bag that moves around capturing enemies on the field. Then they disappear.  
12. There have been centaur characters in adventure games (like in Zelda games) but instead making a "scorpion centaur," half man with a scorpion tail and four legs.  
13. Some magic to possibly include : a ghost sound (like "woooo") that scares away certain enemies. A stun bolt that freezes enemies. A rush of water that washes an enemy away from you. "Dancing swords," swords dance all around the screen and pierce any enemies in its way. Protective triangles moving all around you- preventing anything going beyond them. To add an extra touch to that the triangles could be on fire. "Helping hands," large hands come up from the earth in random places (as four random areas on the screen) and if an enemy is there it is taken down. For grinding there can be a "return" spell. It brings all the enemies back on any given screen. Then you can seamlessly continue grinding.  
14. Like a ghostbuster wand that shoots out electricity, which surrounds an enemy in a sphere, to capture and use like pokemon.  
15. A death ray enemy (like those that shoot powerful laser beams) only in turning triangle/pyramid form. Or a pyramid that goes above your head and protects you that way, shooting down enemies with a beam while it turns.  
16. A weapon that places two cubes, one to the right, another to the left, and creates a protective fence with an electrical connection between the two.  
17. Whether in an adventure game or any game, having a skull above your head that protects you. It shoots out fire while turning around above your head.  
18. In dungeons.. There are four squares on the ground. They each have a symbol on them. If you cross forward on them you get that thing (energy boost, magic power, shadow of yourself to help protect, ect.) Maybe if you cross back over it you have to sacrifice something, if that works.  
19. You capture fairies in the game except there is a special fairy. While all others are red there is a green one. Or maybe there is one other uncommon one, too. They all have different benefits.  
20. Instead of having just four bottles to capture things in or fill up you can have dozens of them. You can mix up the contents as well. You can get special powers by putting a fairy into a magic fluid. There can be a lot of uses for the bottles overall.  
21. You can point a beam at an aircraft above (say at night) and if it responds with a green light it means "yes," and if red it means "no." If yes then you will be magically transported into it which makes roaming around easier.  
22. You can also use "code beams and lights" to find out different things from aircraft above. What color you use is a question. What color it returns with is the answer.  
23. There is a blood river in the game that leads you to a diabolical realm- like hell, hades. If you jump into the river it leads you there. However, later in the game you get a magic raft that sees you to the other side. And in the game you are required to beat both areas. Or perhaps after venturing into hell and beating the area you break the curse, forming the river into normal water allowing you to go forward.  
24. In the game's graveyard a spirit calls out to you to help her. She says, "help! I don't belong here!"  
25. Different kinds of arrows : slime arrow, acid arrow, arrow that dissolves things, poison tips, and three where two curve around and the middle goes straightforward. Something like a laser arrow (lightsaber arrow if you could imagine), something like an arrow that inserts something into something else.  
26. A boomerang that wraps around people instead of hitting them straightforwardly. It keeps the enemies in place.  
27. The "quake hammer" causes a crack on the ground that you can enter into. It only works in places where you are given an indication where it'll work.  
28. Chain breakers get you to special places/areas.  
29. Magic gloves that change everything you pick up. So what would have been a small amount of coins in a pot becomes more. The very sword you hold gains power. Certain areas can be opened up through them. Your bow and arrow is faster while wearing them. You can open certain gloves with them that you couldn't otherwise.  
30. There is a hand in a box blocking your way. Like while you are trying to go through a dungeon door. You have to place something in its hand to get through. Once you do the hand turns to a fist and vanishes.  
31. Mirror shields or "solar shields" work great during the day, but are awful at night.  
32. There is a shark in a lake you need to pass. When you try to go into the water it pops up, blocking you. It'll eat you if you go any forward. But the trick is to give it a piece of meat. When you do you have no trouble crossing.  
33. Sticky gloves let you climb walls, even ceilings to get into an attic. Or to safely descend.  
34. You can visit a witch to get a lucky number. That number helps you solve puzzles. Those puzzles randomly change based on the number. Likewise you can buy a lucky color and the puzzles/hidden things changed based on it. You know it will be a green thing for example that has a hidden dungeon. So if your lucky number is 2 and your lucky color is brown then you know what you are looking for could be a second tree in the forest or a second brown boulder in some area.  
35. The King's strongest knight is a goat-headed human warrior looking with sword enemy.  
36. The game has elements that let you auto play. For example, boots that make you jump out of the way, a shield that turns to something trying to hit you, automatically, gloves that make you strike just at the right time, on their own. It balances out difficulty and lets the player focus on other things, to an extent. Maybe they are things that level up. Such as after being bombarded by an unfair enemy those tools learn to evade such things.  
37. Setting one particular bush on fire brings a fiery face to life. Like a fire with a face talking to you after you set it on fire. It says "you have discovered my secret" and a downward path appears.  
38. Like that old magic idea where demons can't pass through a circle around you.  
39. You can pick what kind of enemy your arrows hone in on. Or you have arrows designed to take down certain things better such as the annoying flying enemies in a game.  
40. Smashing a skeleton or skull in the game with a hammer produces magic dust. You have a spell that turns things into dust in a bottle. You can have so many bottles, some found. The more you have the more magic dust you have. And the dust gives you a power based on what you turned to dust. It comes back to life and now serves you for about 30 seconds.  
41. If you attack a goat it stands up. If you attack it again it becomes a man-goat (devilish looking thing) , something like a warrior, that gets into a serious fight with you.  
42. Attacking ghost spirits too many times will curse your sword. Allowing a ghost to come into contact with your shield will curse it. Certain ghosts who pass through you will turn you into itself.  
43. Including special moves from button combos. Like you find in Street Fighter Mortal Kombat but the idea is used in an adventure game. Press a certain combination and your character will use special powers. Those might be assigned to certain special items/weapons. To use or activate them you have to press a certain combination of buttons.  
44. A radioactive enemy. It glows a color. There could be a green one, red, blue, yellow, ect. If you come too close to their "glow field" then you will be transformed into something strange.  
45. The last place to beat is a castle. It has four gargoyle statues on top that come to life and attack you any time you approach it. You have to get through them first.  
46. When you play a flute tune in a certain area a tree comes up from the ground. It has a doorway to it and that serves as an entrance to a dungeon.  
47. There are ten eyes in the game ever spying on you. If you find and close them all you are not bothered by them any more.  
48. When you touch a statue it comes to life and attacks you, however, if you hit it with a magic wand it comes to life to help you instead.  
49. A wand creates a cloaked spirit that helps you, that fights for you. They are also helpful for finding hidden things.  
50. A wand that creates two walls that come together, squeezing enemies.  
51. A sword that slings damaging fluids. Can even cause your enemies to become dripping wet and dissolve them. Sometimes it dissolves blocked off areas so you can enter. Could be a magic power based thing.  
52. Instead of just "magic power" , a sort of meaningless meter, you have "magic fluid." You can in fact have four or five different fluids of different colors each doing their own thing. It is represented as a vial instead of a meter.  
53. Instead of lighting up a lantern to see in the dark, you can cause your body to glow in the dark, enough to see enough while going around. Maybe you take a dip into a pool of luminescent fluids to have it happen. Or maybe it is just a suit you gain.  
54. You can get baptized by the fairies in the game by going into the fairy pond. Set all the fairies free and they will show you the way.  
55. There are lids in the game, sort of like a sewer lid- a heavy disk, with the power lifting gloves you can lift them. Then a powerful force sucks you into a lower special area.  
56. The World Gems are of significant power. The one that places them in the uttermost corners of the world will be granted the greatest magic. Those gems are in no way easy to come by, however.    
57. A "confuse" wand mixes enemies all up. If you strike them with it twice then they become erratic. The wand makes them spin around like in a whirlwind.  
58. There are the different color rupees. In this game though one appears later in the game, a purple one of greater value. There are the small hearts increasing energy from the start, but later in the game larger hearts appear that refill your energy more. Later in the game larger bombs appear. Not until then can certain areas be gotten to, through them. And later in the game, light arrows appear.  
59. The dark crystal creates the dark castle. The light crystal creates the light castle. The dark crystal is put before a demonic statue to create it. The light crystal is put by an angelic statue to create it.  
60. While playing Willow on the NES there was an enemy that turned me into a pig. It is like in Kid Icarus where you are turned into an eggplant. My idea would be for an enemy to make you have a ball and chain around your ankle, temporarily, restricting your movement.  
61. If you strike the flowers too much bees will swarm you and you will surely die.  
62. Enemies will not attack you as long as you are on a perch. You are trying to get through, the enemies are just too difficult, so you rush from such place to such place until you get to the end.  
63. There is a really powerful wand but with one problem- it has to be charged from shot to shot. So it can only be used once every ten or so seconds.  
64. Bombs usually harm you but with a special cloak you can prevent it from doing so. And that is the only way to use a super bomb without getting hurt.  
65. Burning and melting things : branches create different types of magic smoke for different purposes. Collecting certain wood allows you to safely camp, as its smoke wards off all enemies (that would be suitable for an RPG too.) There could be a shield mold in a game. You just melt crystal, gold, or silver into it and there is your shield. Maybe you can throw a magical gem into the mold as well. The same can form swords.  
66. The lifting glove does what it normally does- lifts heavy things mostly, but if you boost it (by holding down a button) then it goes forward and smashes things.  
67. The effect of entering into another dimension comes from a doorway that appears from nowhere. Maybe there are such doorways all around. A door without a home. And with a special tool you can go through them. Until then, they are mysterious things.  
68. It is your objective to get the magic cloak. The magic cloak resides on the tower of evil or whatever you want to call it (hopefully something better than that.) A sort of upwards going dungeon, to add a nice touch. You need the cloak to enter into the graveyard- it makes you a sort of ghost. In the graveyard the story continues from there.  
69. Sword effects : the tip of the blade spike out left and right (makes targets easier to hit), the blade can be made wider for easier hitting, a sort of triangularly tipped blade, or a curvy blade in various ways, are all more usable in a game (even if they aren't in real life- but games aren't real life.)  
70. You see the shadow of a thing on the floor that gravitates towards a skeleton or any other thing- a statue, something strange maybe. It brings that thing to life and it fights against you. Sometimes when you strike a monster you see its soul like a shadow wandering around, trying to get into something else.  
71. A metal detector and a shovel. An unsafe and abandoned mine with its gems. A rare seed to plant and harvest for big bucks. Special weapons, tools, and items to find while digging. A magical vacuum. Coin rooms where you can quickly just suck them all up. Digging beneath a boulder you bomb- removing the boulder, or removing a tree, a bush, not finding anything until you dig there. That would add a secret to a secret. Just some random ideas.  
72. There is a turtle that looks a lot like a boulder. You can sort of tell it isn't. Maybe it very subtly moves sometimes. If you strike it with just the right weapon or tool it raises up and moves away. Then a secret entrance is found. A secret entrance that was beneath it.  
73. Like Alice In Wonderland walking through the mirror- the mirror, however, is a certain shield of an enemy. It has a magical mirror shield. If you pass through it you go somewhere else. It might be a part of the dungeon puzzle. Could be a dark world entrance or whatever else.  
74. Collecting the four magic mirrors. You line them up in a certain room and then step in the middle for an incredible transformation.  
75. There is a key on a chain trying to get free. It jerks on the screen. It knows you. It was a good person made into a key- a curse placed on them. When it sees you it gets especially frantic and breaks free. You use that for a doorway, naturally, and the moment you do the curse is broken.  
76. You can go into caves that have weapons that are alive. For example, one that has a sword which is alive. It follows you out of the cave and helps you until you die. Magical wands would be good to include, too.  
77. A two prong fork that produces an electric charge, used to energize things, having effects that alter things electrically. It could produce a ball of energy in between that can be charged and shoot out electricity.  
78. An electrical bomb. It disrupts machinery going against you.  
79. The Titan Gloves don't only allow you to lift heavy boulders but also allow you to pluck up thorny and poison needle plants. The grass gives you a bit (coin things) but those otherwise dangerous plants are more useful.  
80. Having "hide and seek" in the game. The more you find them the better the thing you are rewarded with.  
81. A dungeon is timed. If you don't complete it in time you have to start over. It could even cease to exist until later. Or can reappear somewhere else.  
82. After you beat a certain dungeon it transports to a strange place. All dark things go to a special place, a different dimension and you have to face them again before the game is complete. The idea is to confine them there for one last battle.  
83. The Holy Shield. It has an image of an angel (mostly showing its upper body with a tilted and gracious head, pointing out their first two fingers) in stained glass. The diabolical shield. Same thing, only a devil. These are rewarded to you by a temple after coming so far in the game.  
84. A shield with tentacles coming out of it that wrap around, grab, and toss about enemies. Or instead of tentacles, vines.  
85. Tentacles coming out of a window and pulling you in. Or one from a pit, a well, or a crack in the ground.  
86. Every third strike of the sword is stronger.  
87. When you take something during a blood moon it is more powerful than it would be otherwise. There is a special time of harvesting in the game.  
88. You can buy and find random witch letters. Each contains a special and random thing. You can control what they are to a degree by paying more for better letters. You then take the letter to the witches workshop to receive whatever it would produce.  
89. It is your quest to reach the lower world. Everyone who dies goes there. Very few have reached it alive but it is possible. So you are on a quest to meet your loved one(s) again.  
90. There is the regular middle world. The angelic reside in the upper part of the world. And the demonic reside in the lower half.  
91. You are after a rumored power found on top of a massively high tower. The highest part of it is like an Aztecian sacrificial pyramid. It turns out that the power comes from being sacrificed. So the player is told to leave or else be sacrificed. If the player chooses to be sacrificed then they will enter into The Dark Realm. They can be there awhile, gaining lots of great things, meeting the strange, working their way out. Once out they may repeat the whole process again.  
92. You can have magical sheets sewn together. They are each like squares. Each square adds a power to the overall thing. From it a magical thing is produced. Like a square of a wand, a square of fire, a square of power, and a square of effect produces a wand. Or a bow, a certain arrow, a sword, a beam, and so on. Could be a coat of many colors. In so many games you have that special blacksmith but this would be "that special tailor." The special tailor can improve just about everything on your body.  
93. If you come too close to a large jar then a lot of harmful spiders will come out.  
94. The greatest sword sparkles more and more as you come to see it, the further you get in the game the more it sparkles, and the longer you wait to get it the more powerful it will be. You might have to bring magical stones to it. But once it is pulled that's it. As powerful it is at that time is as powerful as it will ever be.  
95. A fairy attracting tool that pulls in fairies for help. It could be that a fairy image is on a wall and whenever you use a special wand in that room it will pull one out to help you.  
96. In Zelda, Link shoots a sword out of his sword when at full health. With this sword however, the character shoots out an axe  from his sword when at full health.  
97. Casting certain fire magic on idols brings them to life to help you. There are the green idols, the gray ones, white ones, and red ones. They each need that color of flame.  
98. The titan glove also lets you pick up and use heavier swords.  
99. On a full moon large trees with entrances come up from the ground. Or, only on the full moon, graveyards open up.  
100. There is a ghoul that leaves behind slime wherever it goes. If you come into contact with it it will harm you.  
101. Certain enemies get trapped on your shield. If they come right upon it they will become an image on your shield.  
102. A black hole tool which sucks enemies into itself. A white hole tool which brings out helpful creatures.  
103. A spinning top weapon. Maybe having some additional touches to that like it spins around fire.  
104. Throughout the game there is a regular looking brown dome. However when time comes to face the last dungeon that dome turns into a mirror.  
105. A sphere on a handle as a weapon. Electricity sparkles all around it and it has lighting power. You get lightning bolt power ups to use it and have to get more of those to continue using it, as it is limited otherwise. Such a weapon can also throw out orbs that roll all around helping you against enemies.  
106. A pitchfork weapon that turns enemies into health/stat boosting food. Some enemies are easily turned into food but some have to be hit with fire magic before you can do so.  
107. After you defeat a dungeon it turns into a helpful palace. Or there are two stages per dungeon and after beating it the first time there comes a second form of it which is optional.  
108. There is a ghost town, more of a "petrified" town. One where all the inhabitants were turned to stone. There is a great dungeon right in the center with a giant medusa head above it. You need a special bag to put over your face before entering or even coming close. So you enter, are safe from the medusa head now, and after you beat the dungeon all of the town's inhabitants return. Before long they are all back to their normal selves and the town becomes very helpful towards you.  
109. A wand to split an enemy in four. When hit with its blast they separate outward in four parts. Some come back together though! Such a skeleton.  

## Platforming Games  

1. Instead of a "piranha plant in a pipe," a king cobra in a large basket. You know one is going to come up when you hear snake charming music.  
2. At the end of a level three numbers flash and a random number between 1 and 3 comes up. There are three different kinds of coins. Whatever one you collected the most of in a level is your number and if it matches the random number you get something special. If any are equal then you get nothing (you can only have one number.)  
3. A large skull with snakes coming out of it as an enemy. If you kill all those snakes then the skull opens its mouth and devours you.  
4. A chain and ball except a skull on a chain.  
5. If you step on top of bricks they become invalidated (useless, if you hit them from below you get nothing after that.) You hear a sound effect and the bricks below you become X'd out.  
6. If you stomp on a brick or smash it from below that matters. That is, if the brick is of a certain kind, indicating that two possible things can come out of it. Maybe if the question mark is upside down then you can only get something by stomping on it. Stomping however is a powerup.  
7. Like in Mega Man you get your own powerup suits. However they don't have their own meter, or any meter. Instead if you get hit once then you cannot use that suit for the rest of the level.  
8. Different hats, a horn hat, a halo instead, all have different effects within the game. Different gloves, a fire throwing glove, a punching/pounding glove all serve as powerups. Different boots too and to make a whole suit based on these.  
9. At the start of the first level of the world you are given a powerup. If you beat every level in the world without losing it then you get to permanently keep it. You can then use it whenever you want and it will never be lost.  
10. Some creatures camouflage themselves into other things. They might presume the look of a treasure chest, boulder, or tree. You can't pass without bumping into them. If you bump into them they'll move out of your way. Some are onerous though requiring you strike them with a sword a few times, so things are not so obvious.  
11. Instead of tossing fireballs, tossing little stars. There is a powerup beyond it that makes the stars larger. Then there is a powerup of throwing star dust instead.  
12. Instead of bricks to smash from below, pots, which after you do dust bursts out and a plant with a powerup fruit comes up.  
13. Every level has three kinds of cards of one thing or another. You can trade them for that thing if you have enough. For example a special powerup or creature to ride on during a level if you get three of its cards and turn them in inside a shop.    
14. There is a lever you can jump on top of that slides down, causing something to happen.  
15. Traveling quickly through a large number of rings. During invincibility rings go up around you. Square rings, triangular rings, ect., doing different things in the game.  
16. A dragon head coming up from a hole. A strange head popping up from a hole and what's stranger is that its neck stretches way high. So you jump on the thing's head and its neck goes high upward to a special upper area.  
17. Instead of going down pipes you just go down holes. They have colored rings around them indicating what's below. Black might be a death trap, blue a watery area beneath and things like that.  
18. Imagine Mega Man but with sub levels. So typically eight levels but now 16. The sublevels are based on the eight robot masters, but what would those sub levels be Maybe they can make the actual boss stage easier if you choose to beat them, which is optional. You can make things easier by beating the sub levels but you don't have to.  
19. There is a dandelion in the game that grants one of three wishes. You only have to jump on it. They are in hidden areas. After doing so you can get one of : a powerup, 50 coins, or extra health.  
20. You can bounce off of a strange plant that comes out of a pipe.  
21. Instead of a frog suit like in Super Mario Bros. 3, you get a mermaid suit powerup. You even get a trident to go along with it.  
22. A shy star instead of a shy ghost. It hides behind a cloud when you look at it. It dives down on you when you aren't.  
23. When time runs down in a level a hard weather thing to deal with comes up, like lightning, a tornado, and earthquakes.  
24. At the end of a level energy left is added to something else like a magic meter. No hits, number of enemies undone, amount of coins or some special thing being gotten, all serve to level you up in a platformer. Points can be tallied up and a reward given for them. Maybe a special suit/powerup or whatever else.  
25. A light whip. Different colors of light do different things. They rise in power accordingly, through powerups (the red light whip is a fire power that makes hotter and hotter whips, the blue one has greater and greater water power until it starts to freeze things, and the white one gains greater and greater lightning power.)  
26. Don't jump on the mushrooms in the game. If you do, you'll become one.  
27. Jump on a tulip. Its petals surround you and take you into a pot (to a lower area.)  
28. A cloud area where you jump from cloud to cloud to cloud. Faces in the sky that blow out clouds. Giant hands on the screen that create tornadoes. Fingers like that make thunder. A giant face spewing out water or wind.  
29. There is a spiral tower that you quickly twirl up on. An upwards spin to a higher area. Maybe you only go up on it if you are running at full speed.  
30. You get a lucky number before you begin to play a level. That number is the one that provides you things, the other numbers will not, and that number is random. During the game you can win extra numbers.  
31. It is forbidden to step in front of a cross. You must jump over them. If you don't then a lightning bolt will strike you.  
32. Walking acorns as an enemy. Looks like a goomba or maybe a turtle shell. Acorn powerups in the same game turn you into a flying squirrel.  
33. Trees try to swat you with their branches. Some of them try to grab and eat you. Sometimes things come out of their mouths.  
34. A walking cactus guy in a platforming game.  
35. There are stars in the sky that turn into people and drop down. They are like people in the form of stars. These are enemies. If you attack them though they might gang up on you so it is better to leave them alone.  
36. If you trigger a secret thing (like holding the "up" button underneath it for 15 seconds) a moon in the sky will come down, you get on top, and it takes you to a later level (like a warp point.) It is a darkish level (dimly lit.) A star does the same thing but level is brighter. Then the sun transports to a desert area not so far from the start. Or another warp idea could be that a whale swallows you and takes you through a deep part of waters, underneath so much, further ahead, and you have skipped a number of levels that way when you emerge back to the top. That could warp you to the future water world area of the game. These ideas could all be done in the first world.  
37. There is a tree that has some valuable fruit. Why would you not get it Well, if you don't then the tree will say "thank you," and say, "hey, have this," it shakes around and something even better falls from its branches.  
38. Imagine Ryu from Ninja Gaiden having a web power with a spider sort of powerup. It adds swinging around to the game. It can pull things in from far away.  
39. Every level you beat brings about a new powerup during the level. Like with above, if Ryu beats a spider boss then web powerups will appear in the rest of the game.  
40. You can ride on a kind of bouncy ball with a handle.  
41. Your riding companion (your "Yoshi" of the game) is a dragon. If you get a fire powerup then the dragon head spews fire, if an ice powerup, then ice, if both are gotten a head is added to its body. Can gain wings to fly. It eats all sorts of things. Can strike with the beak of its mouth. Can create a whirlwind with its wings. Can clutch onto things and take them elsewhere for special purposes. Can gain up to four heads each with its own elemental power.  
42. There is a hidden brick you smash from below that makes all of the coins bigger in the level. They are then worth twice as much. Be careful not to hit the brick that makes all the enemies larger or more harmful, however. Sometimes the powerup goes to the enemy instead.  
43. Different colored feathers. The black feather gives you bat wings, the white gives you angelic wings, the green dragon wings, the blue "water" wings- a stingray A gold feather gives you unlimited flying.  
44. Helmets of animals to embody. Cat ears, mouse ears, ect. Those make the mechanics for you different.  
45. Each level has two yin yang pieces (the black with white dot and the white with black dot, separately) and getting both gives you something special. Or to use the idea differently : They are things you toss. If you have both, you toss both, as weapons. The two do something different while having both do them together.  
46. Adding a touch of RPG to a platformer as so : Just as Ryu strikes the orb in his games, or Simon Belmont a candle, in this game you can get three orbs : one to raise attack, one to raise defense, and one to boost both. The effects are permanent. It is represented in a stat (like a degree of attack power represented by a number.)  
47. A powerup that is a save point. Drop and use it where you want it. Having one being in a difficult side area. A kind of out of your way area, if you'd have the player earn it.  
48. There is a sitting statue with its hands ready to grab something. If you strike it with your whip it will energize it and make it more powerful. If you are using the idea with a sword it could be the statue has an uplifted sword which you clang yours onto. Then your sword is more powerful.  
49. You can place brains into the heads of statues to bring them to life.  
50. A paper, rock, scissors side game. One button= each one. The moment you press your selection the computer randomly makes their choice. Could be the best two out of three to make it a tad longer. You get a star card for winning. Get four star cards and you get something special.  
51. A sphere you can walk right into. Then, within one it floats up like a bubble taking you to cloud land. Maybe your character itself can produce that bubble.  
52. A focus on vehicles : helicopters, rockets, planes, hover, air balloon, boat, submarine, beast to ride on, to fly on. First you'll need to get the keys for them. Maybe they cost a hundred coins. Maybe a lesser one just costs 50. Maybe your whole body can change into a vehicle.  
53. The cloud platforming goes higher, higher, and higher, then you parachute down back to the ground. It could be automatic, just leap off from the top and you are guided down by one. It could be a balloon with a platform at the top. You jump on its platform and you slowly go back down with it.  
54. One of the enemy bosses has a crow assembling its body. It takes the legs, then the middle of the body, the arms, then its head before the fight starts. Maybe after the head it places on a crown, and into its hand a sword. It could keep reassembling the body until you defeat the bird itself. And instead of a crow it could be a dragon.  
55. A "Save" coin. When you get one it saves you from one future death. Then if you are hit by something that would have killed you you don't die, but it only works once.  
56. A switch opens up a cage. It could free a beast you can ride or free a bird your enemies have captured, which will dive down and attack your enemies.  
57. There are walking musical instruments or maybe ones that float and bounce. Sometimes they have bad effects and some have positive effects. If you toss all of the good ones into the same area then they will play a mini concert and something special will happen. The more you get into an area the greater the concert and the thing you receive in turn.  
58. An enemy with a fan head. It blows you away. An enemy with a scissor head. An enemy with a fruit head and the Yoshi of the game can eat it. Then the headless body moves around confused. An enemy with fire for a head. An enemy with three stacked heads. An enemy with a hand for a head. An enemy with a cactus head.  
59. You can throw bottles of potions into a plant pot. Different potions have different effects. You can change enemies into more useful things by throwing a potion on them.  
60. A horse that can stand up and turn into a human. A bear or something else that does. Enemies that shape shift a lot. They might change into a number of different things, not just one. And the player may wait on them changing to just the right thing, a useful thing like something you can ride or fly on. You can only enter certain levels if you are able to transform into specific beasts. Like going underwater, through the skies, places that require you to be very small, or very warm areas you can't tolerate as you are normally.  
61. "Air Jelly Fish" Jelly fish that fly. You can travel on them by standing on top. You have to land and travel on them just right, avoiding its tentacles, and because they come in groups. There can be an area of a "waterless sea" containing things that should not be out of water but are. Maybe not so much dark blue as very light baby blue.  
62. A stack of toy looking monkeys connected together. If you touch it they will all fall apart and come alive. They kind of dangle from above in a line. It is better not to touch them.  
63. Like a hungry hungry hippos thing where the head comes on top and over you, draws you in, and from it you go to a lower area.  
64. You can go through the water to collect special things but it is difficult to get very far. If you "die" in the water you don't die, you are just made to go back up. Maybe next time and with some extra skill you can get the rest of its treasures. It is kind of like TMNT for the NES (the original) where you are in the water diffusing things, and it is easy to die there, but instead you are getting treasure. There can be a certain sea fish that always gets in the way while you are venturing into the water. It brings you back to the top so it has to be avoided.  
65. As for blocks that provide power ups, there are certain blocks that glimmer after you have been on the same screen for around 30 seconds. You can't get anything from them until you see them glimmer.  
66. There are squares with enemy faces on them. If you hit one of them all of those enemies are "turned off." They could be a big nuisance in the game like flying enemies that no longer swarm you. So while fending them off you are trying to turn them away.  
67. Music blocks go hand in hand with the music of the game. If you hit the music block on a certain beat a certain thing will happen.  
68. Power to create magical platforms as desired. Some fly, some have you bounce, let you climb, go diagonally upward, transport/warp, protect, you name it.  
69. A giant keyboard that you can walk on. You can place stones on the keys. A powerup is created through them. Maybe an organ one produces upward going air you can travel upward with. The sound could make enemies weaker, or scare them away. Especially the ones of nuisance. Each key can be a different color needing its own color stone to work. And a rainbow colored stone creates a melody to open up a secret exit. Yellow could provide you with an amount of coins. Then things for different colors.  
70. On top of the screen you have two squares. One has a cup if you have gotten the cup, and the other a powerup stored away. If you have the cup you can make it pour over the powerup to make it more powerful. For example, on the left you have a cup, on the right of it an invincibility star. If you make the cup pour over it before you draw it down then the invincibility will last longer. If you pour it over a powerup that lets you fly then you will fly higher. If over a fireball powerup then the fireball will be larger. You have to get the cup or cups however to do this.  
71. A way to fly coming from wizard cloaks/robes dancing around. They might be hard to land on, but if you do you can fly with them.  
72. A half powerup only gives you half the power a full size one would. In Mario that would be like a half mushroom. Powerups can come in two parts. Speed powerup makes your weapon go forward quicker.  
73. Sometimes, at random times, there are enhancements to powerups. The brick's question mark or whatever you have it sparkles like gold. You then have five or so seconds to smash it to get the better powerup.  
74. A slime ball for a weapon. Maybe there are different colors of slime balls too. One dissolves, one is sticky and so on.  
75. There is a triangular positioned row of blocks. A doorway is in the bottom middle. By jumping on each the door opens and a power up comes out.  
76. You are a ball, basically. A sphere, a magic one. You have a primary body to control. If you are hit you lose that body and either get it back or get another body. Or it can be a powerup to take control over enemies.  
77. The weapon of magic flags which you thrust, each with their own magic.  
78. Sometimes the powerup dances around and if it does then it will be especially powerful. For example a mushroom that does. If you get the one that dances around you will be just a little larger than would normally be.  
79. Having the power of a jester head. You can call it on screen. One of those which has colored spikes as a head piece. Then you can choose which power to burst out according to the colors. Like the red for fire, the blue for ice, brown for earth, and yellow for wind. Or this kind of thing coming out of a cube like a jack in the box, using those against you.  
80. The warp zone is like a rectangular door that comes on screen, spins all around, and sucks you in. Then it reappears elsewhere, and you come out of it. The same effect can just send you to different hidden areas.  
81. There are certain areas you cannot come too close to. If you do, you will be sucked into a bad place. Yet the surrounding things are good powerups. Therefore inch your way towards them without getting too close. Other things could have the same idea like waking up a formidable thing, being spotted in various ways, or a circularly outgoing harmful energy field. That energy field can also randomly go further out than normally.    
82. A plant with a big mouth spews out little men that go against you.  
83. Just like Super Mario Bros 3 had different worlds, each a different thing (desert land, ice land, giant land, ect.) but using that idea differently. Having a world where everything is cutesy (more Super Mario World 2 : Yoshi's Island), and making the world map special like Super Mario Land 2 : Six Golden Coins, did.  
84. Like in Super Mario World where you enter the P switch stage except at the end of it there is a key. That key opens up a door in all levels which has something special inside.  
85. When you throw a fireball on a plant from a pipe it will burn into magical smoke.  
86. Sometimes harmful vines to climb come up and you can't climb them. They're too thorny. You need a powerup to remove the thorns.  
87. An axe powerup can also be used to break chains. Special rooms might be locked up with them.  
88. It is your objective in the game to leave Hell, to get through it, to trespass out of it. Kind of like a Dante's Inferno thing with additional imagination.  
89. Free falling trying to land through baskets while you do. Every time you go through one while falling down you get a level up.  
90. Instead of entering a lower area by going down a pipe you do so by going through a basketball basket. Also the end of the level has a basketball basket you can jump through after tricky maneuvering to get up higher. Like in Super Mario Land 2 : Six Golden Coins, but instead of an upper bell, that basket. Adding an effect of rings below the pole of one. That could be a warp zone or something.  
91. You can lift and carry a cactus plant over your head so that enemies coming from above cannot harm you, but instead be harmed by it.  
92. There are balloon enemies you can pop. You can also use them to bounce around. Or you can become a balloon person and bounce all around.  
93. A black cloud is always trying to dive down on you, capture you, and return you to the start.  
94. Turtle shells come out of bricks. They can be of different colors used for different things.  
95. When you hit a green turtle with a green shell, or a blue turtle with a blue shell, and so on, something special happens based on the color.  
96. A special thing triggers a face to come on screen. The background turns strange and there it appears. It takes you in its giant hand and swallows you which isn't bad, because it takes you to a special area (like a bonus level.)  
97. Twisty poles can come up from below. One like a barber shop pole or candy cane swirl. When you make contact with them you swirl upward into a bonus level. They can have a flag on them with an image of money on them or something. You take that flag and there you go twirling upward into the hidden area.  
98. Little stars burst out of you when enemies come too close. But every time it happens one bar in an energy bar decreases. You can equip it or unequip it. Or just as a temporary invulnerability.  
99. Some turtles have bouncy shells.  
100. You can buy a level skip in a shop. You can buy a half level skip too which takes you right to the halfway point. You can pay to have enemies removed or changed into something else. You can pay to have a powerup added to the game which otherwise would not be there.  
101. Power Up blocks of faces instead of blocks. Like weird heads instead of blocks. Different faces give different things when you hit it. They'll open their mouth and something special comes out after.  
102. A musical note for invulnerability. That instead of a star. There are four types of notes : the eight note, the quarter note, half note, and whole note. Your invulnerability lasts the least when you get an eight note and it lasts the longest if you get a whole note.  

## Open World Games  

1. You can create and trade/sell off music through notation software within the game. "Music by" shows. You can create art, mini books, whatever good thing you can create via software but in a game.  
2. You can create a religion and its rules and all else. Staying a member requires certain things : gathering, doing things assigned by the leader, protecting each other in the game- can be a gang, a religion, or any other type of group.  
3. Having a number pad in a menu and a reference to what certain numbers give you. You can buy numbers to get certain things. Like in a shop you get four numbers to dial in whenever you need something out on the field.  
4. The thief can improve their lock picking skills. You can covertly discover combination numbers for locks. You have a helping spirit that spies. Having a thief character in your party brings more things with all the enemies you defeat. The thief can make counterfeit money. They improve with this over time. However, be warned that sometimes you are caught trying to do so. The shop keeper looks suspiciously at the bill and may or may not discover your crime. If he does then he will tell you to never shop there again. The other shops in the same village may say "no, we don't deal with known counterfeiters."  
5. A brilliant scientist made an android that can travel out into space. The player controls that body with virtual reality. It is a way to go to the moon instead of in an airship or something else.    
6. A helpful map against confusing cityscapes. Place a dot where you want to go, then you go right there. A check mark appears after you have gotten all the things in a particular part of town. A list shows where all the things are like shops. You could scroll down that list and pick one to instantly visit. You are allowed to have a few questions answered if you are stuck at finding something in town. You are allowed to have a few things without having to look for them. So if you are looking for something you just can't find, you can have it given to you, and three of those per town.  
7. Visit the graveyard for some tips. The ghosts there tell you of their past life and some of them allude to where their treasure was left behind. Maybe the whole thing is a ghost pirate ship.  
8. This type of "lost woods" : Follow the blue bird in the forest. The others will get you lost. There is a tree that tells you "now follow the red one." So you follow the red bird. There is a massive tree in the middle of everything. A monkey greets you and informs you that you have to give him something. You do and he climbs high up and comes back down with your magic sword.  
9. Especially in an Adventure or RPG, some weird but cool enemies : A silver tree with swords as branches, and it holds a large gold shield. A zombie with rats climbing all over it. A kind of dragon ghost. A bunny with twisting horns and a mouth that opens sometimes, showing vicious teeth (especially right after you attack it.) A large skull with sharp teeth and blood dripping down them. Vampire that turns into a bat. A pumpkin head guy that throws his pumpkin head at you. When you strike a certain enemy with lighting, s/he raises their hands and just absorbs it (boosting their own power.) A flower that bobs its head around, makes a strange song, then bees rush in to protect it.  
10. There is a video game controller in certain areas of a game. It unlocks older games, mini games, simple one screen games, depending on the form of the controller. Like a joystick you find gives you an Atari 2600 game. A more NES looking controller gets you a more 8-bit game within a game.  
11. You can get coins or tokens for a fun area in a game. The more fun parts as such may only be done with tokens instead of coins. So along the way you get coins to buy equipment but the tokens involve the fun.  
12. A staff that produces snakes everywhere. They immediately go into any magical pots that are around and break them, allowing you to get what's inside. The top of them are too narrow to fit your hand through.  
13. You see a person in a cage above a high castle-like tower. S/he yells out "help, help!" So you decide to go in and save them. Maybe during the game you mysteriously lose a party member and find them later in that circumstance.  
14. Getting magical horse shoes that let your horse fly.  
15. If you feed the birds they will watch over you. If you feed certain animals in the game they will aid you. They'll protect you, find things for you, things like that.  
16. Taking advantage of being turned into something else. Like if you are turned into a monkey it is not a total curse. Monkeys can reach areas in trees.  
17. Riding an elephant that has a hand at the tip of its trunk. It picks up things for you along the way. It is good to use to safely gather things.  
18. A "pray to" feature. You can pray to idols and maybe be rewarded from it. You could pray at a gravestone and something may happen. You could pray to a cross, to a painting, whatever. You may pray to the giant pumpkin and something might even happen.  
19. You choose who to worship in the game. It entails sigil necklaces each with their own power, rings that grant deity based power, being protected by your chosen one, prayers and tithes that help you throughout the game. Each deity has their own thing like a clan and a temple, idols, magic tools, each unique to them. Some deities you worship boost your defense, others, offense. Some are warriors. Others are mages. Each person in your party can worship their own deities but to reach full deity power you must all worship the same one.  
20. The players in the game can create new life- new creatures, beasts. They can create music for their particular area, or set what they want to play. They can also create new.. Magic, equipment, coins, physics, guarding creatures over their domain, new areas, and so on.  
21. Players in the online open world game can donate things they no longer want that other players might be needing. It might be a number ticket based thing. When your number is called up you can have four of anything. Might even be called at the time although you are somewhere completely different in the game.  
22. It has a simulated internet within the game. You go on computers to learn about the game life of the game, to learn about all sorts of things, have questions answered, pull up maps, ect.  
23. Sometimes things wash up on shore. Sometimes they fall from the sky. The people worshiping their gods cause it to happen. Monsters like to hide their treasure by burying it. You might even spy on them while they are doing so. When they leave you dig it up, or just randomly dig to find what they have buried.  
24. Just as an effect : if you stand right in front of a statue for very long it will open its eyes and say "will you leave me alone"  
25. Different glasses to change the graphics in a game. The cartoon glasses make everything appear like cartoons, 2D glasses turn it all into 2D, monster glasses make it all look more wicked, and so on. Maybe some "interdimensional" glasses that make a "dark world" appear all around. The dark world has its own secrets and enemies take on a different form. And if you stare into the abyss the abyss stares back at you. So use them cautiously.  
26. A "Magisizer" in the game turns things into magic fluid for use in magic. You can put anything in it to make the magic fluid but the better the thing you put in the better the result, the more concentrated it is, the slower it depletes.  
27. After doing evil the people lost their "tree of life." Slowly it grows old and dies. The gods say that not until the Chosen Hero succeeds will the tree of life return to them. S/he must go through heaven and hell before they may receive the seeds for a new tree.  
28. For a world-simulated "game," you can choose your cultural style or make new ones. Goth, punk, Wiccan, Christian, or whatever you identify with the most. These are the basis of life for so many people. This would be a gathering kind of thing, in fact you can call it a gathering game. Something where you can meet and learn from your own type of people.  
29. You can send highly personalized letters. You can buy stickers in the game to include on them. You can buy stencils, designer paper, ink that glows, and so on. The participants in the game can go back and forth with them.  
30. You can hire people to draw something for you too and if you like it, you buy it. You could show off both your music and art, your poems, writings, mini games, or whatever else. It must be considered how a game's economy is different from real world economies. What makes a thing worth buying within a game, and how is that money gotten Obviously they are gotten in pretend ways. It would help if you could download something within a video game and print it, make it into physical form in various ways. Having a 3D printer to aid you in it. Maybe things like that will someday come into reality.  
30. Teaching real world things in the game.  
31. "Useless facts" or "fun facts" in the game. Such as in books here and there. Other little snippets of text like proverbs and short poetry.  
32. There is a binding spell that allows you to ride on beasts. You can't traverse without taking control over the dragon of a cave. Until then you are stuck.  
33. You can throw in the hat and just decide to be evil in the game. First, you have to visit the garden of the forbidden fruit and eat from it. Then you are transformed to a character in the game intent on wrong doing. If you want to return to the Holy/Paladin state then you'll have to convince heaven that your ways have changed. Then there are The Gray Ones..  
34. The day is very long but there are certain things you can do to make the time go by quicker, literally. Certain things you do speed up the clock. Maybe it is just drinking some coffee.  
35. Coffee and energy drinks to boost your vigor. Other drinks to put you at ease. Health drinks to raise HP. Strange concoctions to increase MP. A thing to increase focus, and so on.  
36. Clouds of different colors come together to form one color, and each color causes its own things to happen.  
37. A power to have the wind rise and carry you forward, going over any enemies on the ground.  
38. Your enemy taunts you. On your birthday a cake falls from the sky on top of you and your god-like enemy says "happy birthday!" On an april fools day you think you have the greatest treasure ever and it just disappears into thin air "april fools!"  
39. Magical stickers have a number of effects. If it is an RPG game then it can be images of captured beasts. They can just be number based. Numbers beside an image mean certain things. They can be move-around points, transporting. They can draw in or draw out. They could "holify" a place (make it an energy restoring room.) They could make a room that breaks a curse.  
40. You rent out wall space for advertising, such as posters you buy or create. Or you can graffiti on walls. Sometimes the gamer who owns that wall comes to it and sees it is splattered with graffiti. The gamer can set an image for a can. In other words they draw it out and the can always produces that image/word from then on. It can be reset too. Maybe paint is limited, they have to buy more cans from time to time.  
41. Each gamer has a flag according to just what they are in the game. Whatever class, culture they belong to, tribe, clan, ect., is all represented in a flag. It could be a crest, too, with symbols indicating it. These flags are on a person's home, the crest at their door, and possibly other places. Each has a kingdom in the game, so like minded people can gather and work for each other, learn and fight for each other, and grow together. What they represent can be seen in their places, through art, fashion, music, lessons, and so on. The game could largely be about different cultures. Different professions too, whatever a person is akin to.  
42. A "Religions of the World" game where religion of all kinds are taught. Very books can be made. People in it post texts of their beliefs. These form into books for their religion, which can even be made into real world books if you have agreed to a public domain presentation. The topics can be broad : history, texts, primary tenants, most important books, books within the bible, teachings from particular figures, imagery, symbols, and so on. They are all organized as well as could be. You could perform a sermon. Technology is at a point where it can AI everything- speaker, text turned into realistic speech from an AI generated person. Just set up your church and give a daily lesson.  
43. A doorway appears in a random area of the game, randomly changing where it is, every video game day.  
44. There are vehicles that can only be used with magic fuel. A magic fuel for every kind. Or there are longer lasting fuels to buy. Certain fuels can change the vehicle too, transforming them into something else (or maybe magic stones do that.) And certain fuel can bring magic power or weapon power to the vehicle.  
45. There is a special vaccine you can take before you are poisoned. You are then purposely infected by it in order to become more powerful, more invulnerable.  
46. A giant skeleton with a bag puts you into his bag and takes you some place.  
47. Magical feathers will resurrect you after you die. There is an aggressive phoenix in the game that you can take magical red feathers from any time you defeat it.  
48. There is a witch that can write magic papers for you. Maybe just a symbol on a paper. She can only do so with a magic feather, however. So after finding it and giving it to her you can have one such paper made for you.  
49. An enemy boss with slime for a brain. It has the upper half of its skull missing with the slime inside. Slime comes out of its mouth and fingers. Beat it once but more slime comes into its head, then to fight again.  
50. An enemy (or helpful thing) with lamps for heads and when you make contact with the light it makes something happen. Like a green light can pull you up to a higher area. A black light can bring you down into a lower area. A red light will just harm you. A blue light will increase your energy.  

## RPG Games  

1. Having a glitched out screen at a game over.  
2. A bottle of pills fixes just about anything. The game has a lot of different types. They change your health, your status, power, ect. But coolest of all they slowly transform you into something else. So you take monster pills once every video game day and in time you become one. Just don't overdose or it could kill you.  
3. There are four meteorites during the game. They each come during a blood moon. The first comes early in the game, the fourth when the game is nearly done. So throughout the game. The first is yellow (air) , the second green (earth) , the third red (fire) and the fourth blue (water.) By visiting these your magic power increases accordingly.  
4. You can get a remedy for a cheap cost. Or you can get a vaccine at a higher cost. The vaccines may be split into two doses.  
5. You can get a power boost under the stipulation that if you discontinue treatment you are left weaker than before.  
6. A second screen sort of thing. A square that shows things elsewhere or to flip between characters and what they are doing. Used maybe to look around, to call someone up, or to keep an eye on something. It can be used in two player mode to keep in contact with another player. And there can be three or four of those for an RPG team in multiplayer.  
7. A King has lost his treasure of coins, coins very special to him, and they are found scattered throughout the game. The more you find for him the more he will reward you with special things.  
8. A twist in the story is that you have to die to travel to Hades in the ghost ship. Once in the depth of Hades you get something. Then you fight your way out from bottom to top.  
9. There is a switch in the game that changes the music. The character flips it, the music changes, then one says to the other, "I don't think it does anything."  
10. There is a "darken" spell that makes the random encounter more difficult than it normally is- a spell cast when grinding if you are wanting more exp points and those things.  
11. A "strange face" enemy encounter. It shifts around in five phases. First it is an ordinary face. After some attacks it grows horns, becomes more dangerous. Hit it a few more times and it gains elf ears, a little more dangerous. Then its nose becomes devil-like and eyes popping out.  
12. There is a person that needs your help. Their daughter is possessed and they are sure you can break the curse. After defeating the evil spirit that has taken over her you are rewarded.  
13. The airship you would use is cursed. There is a strange statue at the front of it. The airship came cheaply, the owner knew it was cursed, and said if you can beat the evil spirit statue then it's yours. You have an airship already maybe, or something lesser, but this one is worth the fight- the difficult fight.  
14. At the end of a dungeon you get an impressive sword. There was a dead king on a throne holding it. You took it from his hand. Then you begin to leave the dungeon when you hear the words "you can't take my sword," and things like that, over and over. And just before you are about to leave the dungeon you see a kingly looking spirit blocking your way. If you are going to keep your nice sword you'll have to defeat him.  
15. A different way of getting magic : when you capture an enemy you can do much more than have it fight for you. You can gain spells from them too. You isolate the enemies you defeated and while you level up you get magic through them. Maybe magic level up if you want it that way. So if you capture a bee then you will gain maybe four spells, each better than the one before. Such as "sting," "honey cure," or whatever. Capturing a scorpion enemy gives you "Sting 2" perhaps. But you can only hold onto three or four captured creatures at a time. When you are done with them you can work on getting magic from other creatures.  
16. An air spell that fills the monster with so much air that it bursts. Works especially well when the monster's mouth is open. There is even a kind of enemy whose stomach is full of gold, and once bursted through the spell money flies everywhere, for you to take.  
17. A bridge of rectangles, one after another, of different colors, a hard bridge to pass because each rectangle is an encounter. The reward at the end is good though.  
18. Sometimes when you cast fire it burns off the flesh of an enemy but its skeleton keeps fighting, maybe a zombie thing. Sometimes when you cast an air burst a fighter loses its shield- or maybe a hat giving them power. There is a frankenstein on the playfield. Other enemies animate it with lightning. You strike it down and they bring it back to life for as long as you don't defeat them.  
19. A grid for your path, like a checkerboard grid, which you can move left, right, backward, or forward onto. There are different paths to choose based on rows. If you go straight up and nothing more then you will have mastered one thing. If you go totally from left to right then you will have learned the rudimentaries of any given thing. If you complete the entire checker board then you will have mastered everything. If you master everything then you start over to make things of yourself yet more powerful like "Board : Level Two."  
20. Every character has a light side, a dark side, and a gray side, which can be switched to at will. If you choose your character to be dark, then they are better at offensive magic. If you choose them to be light, defensive, and if gray they'll have a weaker amount of both. It's an idea that can apply to things other than magic too.  
21. In either an RPG or Adventure game you can collect grave dust from a graveyard. It gives you death magic. Swamp water in a bottle gives you poison magic. Waterfall water in a bottle provides healing waters. And so on.  
22. Eight rings in the game reach their full potential after a while and then anyone that wears them, whatever character, can use its full power.  
23. A glove that breaks a curse. The only way to wield weapons that are cursed is by equipping it.    
24. You can use a shop's sword if you give a portion of the money you gain from using it, in defeating monsters.  
25. Lots of money comes from monster parts. Sometimes its meat is valuable, sometimes its horns or tusks, and some things contain magical properties that are fully realized through a mage. There could be a "harvester" job class. The more the job class levels up the more you can identify the qualities of things and use them.  
26. A "right enemy" arrow that strikes at just the right one.  
27. During a random battle the whole environment can change. The enemies can take you to their realm- a graveyard if a ghost, a forest if a fairy or bird and so on. You can even stay in that strange place after the battle, needing to find your way out, but maybe finding something nice before you do.  
28. There is a special area that lets you level up and evolve your stats and talents. You can choose what to evolve there. Defense, attack power, magic power, new spells, strength, vigor, whatever you want can be your focus or if your focus is well rounded, that too.  
29. Instead of a "cursed" sword, one that is radioactive. It glows green, looks nice, practically a lightsaber. To be able to handle such things you need to take a potion that renders it harmless against you.  
30. A tower of gifts for those who level up. After leveling up it can be visited to receive surprise things. You just go up on an elevator (maybe a magic elevator thing if that suits the game better) and you can enter into the room of your level to receive certain things. Bonuses too perhaps, if you have done especially well. The items inside can also be adjusted to how the player likes to play the game. Maybe having eyed something they couldn't get, they find it there.  
31. Villages sometimes have a piano, or sometimes an organ, or harpsichord (just for variety) with sheet music beside it. The bard character sits and plays it, then learns a new musical power.  
32. Random battle enemies talk to you more and have more sound effects to them. Some make strange sounds, maybe demonic sounds, and sometimes talk to each other while you are fighting them.  
33. Traveling around in a better and better vehicle has always been a staple of JRPG games. Lesser to never used ideas include : a hot air balloon, a flying carpet, a flying elephant, a fire hooved horse (to draw from the movie Krull), a witches broom, pegasus boots, gaining wings, as for flying. As for ground movement, travel underground in the mouth of a giant sand worm. A magical kind of drill to travel under the earth. A thing that can jump so greatly as to jump right over mountains. Part the sea like Moses. There could be a king at some point who knows your cause and decides to help you with a bridge being built. The ground itself may be too dangerous to traverse, like a lake or river of lava, but with a special vehicle you can traverse.  
34. An "old age" spell that makes you old. You will walk around really slowly until you remedy it. Kind of like a poison spell that makes every move you make deplete HP, except it is just a thing that slows you down and makes your attacks weaker.  
35. A trumpet is used to call on summons. Each summon has their own melodic phrase. That is played automatically depending on what summon you call forth.  
36. You can combine characters during a battle to make yourselves more powerful. If hit enough you are separated back into regular form. It could be a temporary effect dependent on magic. Maybe you can become one with the monsters too, absorbing them in a magical way.  
37. In the game there is a singular "crown of light," and whoever wears it glows with light. After each battle they gain twice as much experience, too. You can choose who wears it, but there is only one in the whole game. You can add to that a "crown of darkness" which doubles your defense. Then other types of crowns are possible too.  
38. There is an area of magic air. The wind can be seen there, it is of different colors. It is an area where you can level up without having to grind. Each color represents a stat that it increases. The red for the strength of a player. The blue for defense and like that.  
39. Leveling up comes from objectives instead. The more you do, sometimes by a certain percentage, levels you up. Level ups can come from a treasure chest or some such thing. The idea is that they come from something other than random battles. You might get money from enemies and after you have collected enough then you can just buy a level up. In fact you can skip level two and three if you have gotten enough money from defeating monsters, buying level four instead. I would say though that money for it can only come from defeating monsters. Call it monster money or something.  
40. There is a priest you visit and s/he goes over how well you are doing to determine if you should be awarded with..  
41. There is a legend that a dragon stole a great book of magic from the greatest magis. If you can find and defeat that dragon then you will have gained that great book of spells.  
42. You also level up by slashing grass. It's just that it is a really slow way to do so. Each grass you cut gives maybe just one experience point. You get a tiny bit of experience points from other things though, even from walking.  
43. The game moves forward from day to night, the next day, season, and in video game years your characters have birthdays and are rewarded for it. It could raise your "wisdom" stat, and it is the only thing that does. The wisdom stat makes you just a little bit better at everything.  
44. We all sometimes wonder : the characters are always in the same clothes. They never bathe, or use the restroom. The game can make jokes of this like having one NPC in a random place tell you "you stink! Ever heard of taking a bath" or, "man, these clothes are getting dirty."  
45. A yin yang thing where the black with white dot represents black magic power and the other white magic power.  
46. Towards the end of the game there is a meadow where a flute player plays different tunes. S/he conjures up different beasts/monsters throughout the game. It is a battle area for fighting everything before and up until then.  
47. If you have a thief character in your party then they will automatically see what the monsters may drop. Just text at the top of the screen for example, as soon as the battle starts, which may read "has elixir" or whatever else.  
48. The thief character can increase their chances of stealing- by percentage. So say it is a one percent drop, with leveling up that number increases to 5, 10, ect, percent.  
49. The thief element in a game evolves. After the thief has taken all of what a monster has, a new set of things appear, each better, but each with less likelihood of getting them.  
50. Drops and thieves go hand in hand in the game. You get better drops when you have a thief in your party, and, the more that are in your party, all the better.  
51. The thief based job can even steal souls. That is, if s/he has certain magical gloves. Serves as blue magic (magic that lets you take control over monsters having them serve you.)  
52. In a number of ways different jobs do the same thing, just in different ways. Like said above, that would be how a thief uses blue magic. A warrior/knight uses blue magic with a "tame" sword. A martial artist can grapple into submission. A Bard can take over the monster with just the right tune (and probably some experimentation involved in that to spice it up.)  
53. There is a wealth-based job class. When they level up they don't gain extra HP and things like that. In your party they are rather fragile but worth having around, because when they level up their salary increases. Salary is automatic such as every 20 video game days.  
54. Some Level-Up Ideas : "Ability" has its own experience points. Maybe even a number of things have their own experience points. Not just for "level up." But ability leveling up gives you a new ability each time it does. Spell gives you a new spell each time that levels up. Gift gets you a new gift each time that levels up. Just a sudden surprise, it levels up and you get a cool thing. Salary levels up and you get a chunk of money. Halfway through leveling up you always get a gift, such as an Elixir. Depending on the level you are halfway towards getting, the gift gets better and better.  
55. Blessing of the gods theme where if you appease them enough you will be married to them (spiritually) and gain all their power and sorts of other things. There are eight to be obtained, each for a finger. The pinky is the most minor. The middle finger is the strongest, but the index finger more tactile, and the marriage fingers more solemn. The first marriage finger ring marries you partially to the greatest, with the second half fulfilled through the second marriage ring (the one on the other hand.) Or the left hand marriage ring marries you into darkness while the right side one to what is Holy. If you want, you could also boost the effect with the "eight great gems" to obtain.  
56. Your fighter/monk character has a physical attack that is both powerful and dangerous. It is dangerous because it may break their arms or legs. If it doesn't then you have accomplished a powerful attack without harming yourself. But if it causes your arm or legs to break then the character will be left weak until it is fixed. There is one such attack for the arms and another for the legs.  
57. Some spell ideas : "Sparkle," or "Glitter" adds to your health and restores status ailments at the same time. Fireworks as a spell- very flashy and full of lights, especially at night time. "Glow" instead of "Regen." "Dancing Fire" attacks your enemies with little flames that are alive and move. Summon a thing that goes up to the enemy and punches them in the head a few times. A reverse Tonberry thing. Tonberry slowly goes towards you and if it reaches you it kills you with its dagger. But instead it is you inching towards an enemy. Or maybe you can summon a Tonberry like thing. Doesn't even have to be something that is alive. "Abomination" combines two enemies into one, creating a grotesque and harmless thing. Sometimes though, not often, but sometimes it gives them a special power against you. If you want to go violent you can make a head explode or have the enemy wailing in pain from being set on fire. There are levels of being frozen. About the fourth freeze magic attack it is completely frozen. If you use a sword against them right after that they will shatter. Spells can have a subtitle such as Fire 1 (Flame), Fire 2 (Blaze), and Fire 3 (Ashes), just for an added touch. Once in a while a spell only costs half the MP. A thing called a lucky cast. Having Regen for MP instead of HP. In a way that makes the cost of MP go down and down throughout the battle.  
58. If you hear a wolf howl then they are about to enter into the fight. If you hear a beast roar or a dragon, if you hear a ghost, then they are about to enter the battle. Sometimes it is too formidable to fight but if you escape the battle you won't have to fight it.  
59. Magic that has multiple results. Take a Tarot card where each card can have a few different meanings and if upside down, those are reversed. The Sun card can cause fire magic, have something to do with a horse or child as the card indicates. Some can be simple. If you draw a magician card then all of your magic power will be increased. Death makes a death spell and so on. Tea leaf magic can do a similar thing. That is where you throw tea leaves onto a circle and most of the tea is in one spot, a little elsewhere, and sort of jagged. The spell is determined by where the tea lands.  
60. A quick and ready guide with how to make the game can come from real world magic. Magic stones, magic herbs, alchemy, ect., with a lot available to include.  
61. A dagger that grows into a sword.  
62. You can mutate your sword in slime. Its form shifts into something more wicked looking.  
63. Super enemy bosses can cast you into a hellish labyrinth through a spell. Or, if you lose against them, you are sent there.  
64. The Gold Spell makes all of your party's weapons and armor gold for greater attack and defense.  
65. The uproot spell pulls up herbs, which can be used for magic or other things.  
66. The Hell spell creates a crack on the ground where a demon comes out to help.  
67. The Heaven spell opens up the sky to bring down a helping angel.  
68. The Purgatory spell stops time for enemies.  
69. The Glitch spell glitches out your enemies and makes whatever they do faulty.  
70. There is a weapon, a whip, that brings forward enemies and takes their power.  
71. Tithing to an idol helps you in the game. They each help you in their own way.  
72. A light emitting shield for darker dungeons. A light emitting shield that reveals secret areas.  

## Fighting Games  

1. The last battle in the game is against your own self, your "evil self" or something like that. And the AI knows your every move so it really is like fighting yourself.  
2. A randomly made character to fight. Four different pieces are put together in its body from a lot of different things, so there's no telling exactly what that will be until you get there. Maybe it is made up of the four characters you had the hardest time beating.  
3. A street fighter type fighting game has things like strong punch, weak punch, strong kick, weak kick. A wrestling game should instead have a "grab" button, a "throw" button, a "spin" button," a "counter" button, a "lunge" button, a "pull" button, and a "push" button. It makes more sense and makes the game control as it should. There might be a quick button press pressing over and over again quickly to break free. If you hold down a button like in a boost style then any given move would be more powerful. You can store those in fact. So, the more buttons you boost the stronger your moves. Also, when on the pole about to land on the other player you can boost your power before you drop down on him or her. You could also set special moves, storing them away. Like in Street Fighter 2 when you do a combination of buttons it gives you a fireball move or whatever else, in a wrestling game you could do the button combo and hit the "store" button. When that "store" button is pressed again it will initiate that special move. Finally, you charge a button so you can more strongly rush towards your opponent while the other player may be boosting their block button.  
4. Create your fighter. Choose a suit, appearance, accessories, powers, martial art style, and so on. Some of these might be won during the game/ gotten with money from winning a tournament.  
5. The final level is set in hell and is against Satan himself. The red devil type with horns, red cloak, and tail. The boss before him is a warrior goat (Baphomet type) enemy. In fact the whole game is set against the major demons- Lilith, Samael, Abaddon, whatever you want. If Lilith then it is a serpent tree setting type of thing that resembles her in the Garden of Eden. If Abaddon then in the abyss, as his legend goes. The demons themselves appear just as they are said to (Mammon is a fat belly elephant on two legs, Leviathan is a water dragon.) Aspects from other demons could be included to go against the player, just not as those literally fought against- like the appearance of Beezlebub. Maybe the concept is that you are trying to rule over hell as a demon yourself, according to the demon you choose to play as. And then whatever small detail like the Devil has a pitchfork, sigils being used, and so on.  
6. The fighter can leave their body and become a ghost. On the playfield the body stays there on its back while the fight continues as or against a ghost. The player can re enter their body too if they want. Instead of becoming a ghost you could become an angel or Devil-looking demon.  
7. Just when you were about to defeat the last boss it turns from a human to an alien. Its alien form is much more formidable.  
8. There are phases to a fight. The first fight is bare knuckle. The second round allows for powerups (like fireball attacks or special attacks) and the third, if the round gets there, is a weapon based fight.  
9. There is a setting for either three rounds or four. Four rounds could lead to a tie breaker. The player has these options before they begin the game.  
10. When you defeat an opponent you may take one of their powers. You choose which one.  
11. Background and environment ideas : There is a werewolf character and a growing moon in the background. When the moon in the background becomes full then the fighter changes into a werewolf. If the vampire fighter gets your blood it grows in power. If you uppercut the vampire into the blood pit below it will only gain in power. It will fly back up to the top as a bat. Water below will short circuit an android like fighter. A lightning using character gains more power through background lightning. A skeletal fighter fights in a graveyard, and skeletons come up to help him. But if you are a ghost character it goes against the skeleton, as ghosts come up instead.  
12. Every fighter has their main enemy. For example a vampire hunter goes against the vampire better. But the vampire fighter goes against something else better. Like a rock paper scissors thing. An android is weak against a fighter with lightning-like power. One fighter can have a sword, another a shield. Could be an energy shield. Could be invulnerable to them.  
13. The final boss can poison you if you are struck with one of their needles. Then your energy goes down gradually, slowly, but surely. The final boss has a magma power, s/he calls down magma from above and if it lands on you then you will literally melt. They have an ice power too. They bring up ice from below and if it contacts you then you will freeze, shatter, and die.  
14. If you perform a fatality before the baphomet throne (its image in the background of a certain level) then the human goat figure of baphomet will come alive and you will have to face it. Or, as the final enemy. During your next to last fight there is a baphomet on a throne in the background that comes alive after the victory and you fight it.  

## Sports Games  

1. A game called "bowling alley." It has bowling, an arcade room, a pool table, and maybe a pong or foosball table.  
2. Enhanced basketball (after all video games don't have to be exactly the same as the sport. Final Fantasy 10 has underwater soccer after all.) But there is a triangle of baskets instead of one. One on the lower left, the lower right, for two points and a high middle one for four points.  
3. Remember that video game sport games do not have to be just like the actual sport. You can go either way but feel free to be innovative when changing aspects of the actual sport within a video game. Like "Mutant League Football," which is (American) football set in the future. Or the many ways the Mario franchise mixes things up and changes them.  
4. Having the game switchable from overhead, first person perspective, or to look into the eyes of different players (from one to five different ones- in a set of screens.) If in a football game you have the eyes of the quarterback and the major players if you want them. There could be an eye icon that means "I see you." Or it can be closed meaning "I can't see you right now." Then there are one to three stars that come up on the screens. One star means "possibly caught," two means "likely caught," and three means "very likely caught." These icons can appear above the player in a football game. Other icons can be added to the whole thing.  
5. In a baseball game you can get the thought of the hitter in a bubble. The words "curve ball," or "fast ball" come up. Sometimes the hitter doesn't know- most of the time in fact, and "" comes up.  
6. A very highly complex fishing game. Call it "Ocean Fishing." There are a very large amount of different fish and sea life in the game to catch.. With nets, poles, cages. Or the idea can be inside an adventure game. One that makes the ocean a more game-valuable place. Could include Atlantas and ship wrecks, oysters with pearls, and treasure that is defined as video game treasure. Like a black pearl for a black magic wand.  
7. Having a limited number of powerups that slows things down. That gives you time to think. For every play in a football game the quarterback can see a still image. Just one. When he wants it.  
8. In an (American) football game the quarterback is given sound effects to indicate where open players are. Then you fire your ball into that direction. You might add to that that when the sound effect is louder it is even more likely to hit its mark.  
9. Also in a football game when you become the receiver with the ball it goes into a larger character screen. That will give you a better idea of how to maneuver around as opposed to seeing small characters and hence small details.  
10. And in a football game the players can have all of their own colors. While in regular football games the players all have a team suit in a video game it is more helpful when the helmets at least are each their own colors. Either that or represented by numbers which is fine too. But the color can be added to the number to indicate the best action to take. Such as hearing or seeing "blue number 12" the color means something and the number is the player. You know which number is the best option, they are known as better or worse than the other players. But color can indicate things such as the likelihood of success. Green can mean they have good field control, they can run far. While blue can mean they are likely to catch the ball, and so on. The colors can be represented by lines across the field.  
11. Then in a football game there can be five squares on the upper part of the screen that shows player number and what area of the field they are in. The upper part of the screen can be a grid/square based representation of where everything is.  
12. The baseball has a color. A red ball, green, blue. The meter for the batter has a randomly placed color. The meter goes left right, left right, and when it hits that color is the time you should strike. It happens so fast. If you take too long you will be striked out. But if you get the neighboring color you will get a "ball." If you are apart from there you will probably get a "foul." Any further away you will get a strike. And, if you get in the very center of the right color then you will get a homerun, at least 75 percent of the time.  
13. A variation of basketball that you could call color-ball. There are four baskets each of a different color and balls the same. The balls are always changing color and the baskets are always shifting around in color.  
14. Using a double license. A game where you can choose between college football or NFL football. NBA, WNBA, that would draw a female audience.  
15. Create your own team feature. You design the helmet, name, location, and all else. I would make "The New Mexican Outlaws." I grew up there and we didn't have a football team. The helmet would be yellow with a black colt revolver on it. The idea is to be more badass than the Raiders and a counterpart to "America's Team" (the Cowboys.) Just a side note I wanted to share.  

## Racing Games  

1. The vehicle that can run over any of the others, it has large spiked tires, maybe that's a powerup. Other powerups : a power up that lets you bounce/leap over the other vehicles, one that lets you leap to the left or right, one that lets you ghost through other players and so on.  
2. You can flip your vehicle to make it something else. Or, if you get flipped over your vehicle changes to a different one.  
3. You can raise a bar to touch an upper energy boosting wire. It recharges you but slows you down. If you avoid getting hit then you don't need it.  
4. One powerup is a square that recharges you and only you. You place that square anywhere you want to on the track.  
5. There is a powerup giving square that works randomly. You have a 50/50 chance it will give you a powerup but a 50/50 chance it'll give it to another player. You don't have to drive over it. It makes the game more fun when you suddenly get a power up knowing that someone else messed up.  
6. A "star wheel" powerup. It makes your tires into turning stars and any one that gets it your way will be damaged.  
7. A cloud powerup lets you fly above momentarily. Maybe you can also send down rain and lightning in some way.  
8. An area of fog that is difficult to see through. A darker area and you always need to fetch the lights before getting there. Needing to pick up a thing right before an area so it'll be easier on you. Like a wheel powerup right before a slicky area.  
9. A competition or mini game before the races start. Those that do the best will be able to choose from the best vehicles.  
10. A kart game based on different animals. The elephant can drive all over people although it is slow. The bird can fly to an extent. The monkey can pull off tricks. The cheetah is super fast. The mouse is good at evading things. The dog is well rounded. The cat can cling to side walls and leaps around. Call it "Animal Race."  
11. You have a team of racers that you help out. Teams against teams. Color against color. Blue versus green. Your objective is to help your fellow racers and attack the other ones together.  
12. You have two or three additional vehicles on the side lines. You'll lose time by stopping and getting into one of them but it can be helpful.  
13. F Zero has your energy raised by driving over an energy field. My idea is to transform/upgrade your car that way instead. So by driving over it your vehicle gets larger and stronger, faster, ect.  
14. A powerup that turns your vehicle into a ball, when you activate it, so you can get through a narrow area, a short cut. Or use it to move around easier and faster, temporarily.  
15. In a Kart like racer you can get puzzle pieces, needing four before you get a really good powerup.  
16. Normally first to third place wins and fourth and so on does not. However if you get the trophy powerup you will qualify with fourth place.  
17. In a Kart game you could have a ghost drive for you, if you are losing then it might be helpful. The ghost is really good at driving. Sometimes it stands on the sidelines waiting. Sometimes it doesn't appear at all. If it does appear it is usually because you are losing. But if you happen to see it and are losing you can stop beside it and it'll take over.  
18. During the final lap fire appears on the sidelines of the road- that harms the drivers who touch it. The final lap provides two points instead of one. New things appear, and things like that.  
19. There is a thing that should not be made contact with because if you do it will affect every racer in the game, in a bad way. Or maybe it positively affects every racer but you, making them all faster while it has made you slow. All of a sudden your speed boosts and you just know some fool wasn't paying attention.  
20. There is a cube brick that comes apart after being hit a few times. If hit the first few times it starts to break apart but makes you crash if you do. The final hit though makes a special powerup appear for that one last (and good instead of bad) contact.  
21. You shoot a gun at a brick that's ahead of you to reveal a powerup. The trick is that it must be a special gun power. Maybe one charged up. Like in F-Zero fashion where you drive over an area to gain power. Once your gun is fully charged you can shoot that cube brick to get a powerup. There are four such cubes though- each with their own random things. Those cubes can be all the same if you want, or there can be one that requires an especially high level gun power. So not until the gun the player has is fully charged (more than normal) can they strike it and get a powerup from it.  
22. There are two possible courses in the same track. You are randomly sent to one or another. There is a thing you drive by which randomly places you on one track or its neighboring track. Sort of like a Y switch.  
23. There is a ramp that lands you right onto a better vehicle, if it hasn't been taken yet by another player. Maybe two of those for a little better a chance for everyone. It is a tricky ramp to cross. You have to be at full speed, otherwise you will fall into a pit.  
24. You can choose from a positively giving powerup block to drive through or a possible power up giving block. The first will certainly give you something, but the better power ups are reserved for chance.  
25. Everyone gets a free powerup during the last lap. Should be something nice and all players get the same thing. Would be better if it was a special powerup, special because it is the only time you get them in the game.  
26. The players can set booby traps. In fact some deceptively look like powerups. Like the poison mushroom versus the powerup mushroom sort of idea. Traps can be set, some which the player is vulnerable towards too, or not.  
27. The player can hide their power ups. Ever play Mario Kart and think you wish you had that later In this game you can hide them invisibly to all the other players except yourself. The track has kinds of spots characters don't normally go across. Some are too out of the way. And maybe that hidden powerup could be out of the way. It would be both good and bad- slows you down but gives you something you might really need.  
28. Armatures on the vehicles such as punching mechanisms, grappling, spikes, wind gusts that push away, electric fields shock and drain other driver's energy, and an energy dome that gets larger pushing everything away in a circumference. There are power ups in the game and these as well, tools. As a prize the tools may only be available during the second half of the race.  
29. You can drop tire spikes. They may be in on and off fashion (spikes go up-down-up-down.)  
30. You can drop a false powerup square. Those that drive over it think they are getting a power up, but they get nothing!  
31. The last lap is the longest but has double the power ups.  
32. A weapon that freezes the other racers. Can also be used to make slippery areas. Can also be used to freeze weapons against you from hitting you, if you have good timing, like those things coming towards you.  
33. The game has "job classes" in a racing sort of way. The mage racer has magic power, the warrior racer has weaponized cars, the enchanter can cause strange effects helpful to him or her, and the summoner can call on help.    
34. A de-powerup that temporarily turns your wheels into squares.  
35. There is a temporary bridge which is a shortcut. It is a disappearing and reappearing platform. You cannot cross it without a speed powerup though. If you try without one then it will be disadvantageous.  
36. With a fire based powerup you can unfreeze blocks containing neat powerups.  
37. A "powerup" that changes the weather. It doesn't really help the player. But it is cool, changing the environment. For example one that causes lots of winds, or makes everything icy, or makes it rain. 
 
## Gambling Games  

I don't have a lot of ideas here but the ideas here are sure to have you make the best gambling game that has ever been!  
1. A "set your chances" game I thought up once. There is a grid of bars. The upper part gives you the most points, only at the lowest percentage to get them. The middle is average and the lower gives you the least points but with the most likely chance to get them. You have so many to choose from trying to get the most points.  
2. A gambling game and slots or even if you are just making an LCD based slot game : you can put money into the three bars instead of just over all. The more change you put into each raises your chances of winning more. For an idea : mixing poker with slots. You have five cards shown on the lot machine (five bars.) Such a thing can be pretty complex but the aim is to get the best hand you can. In a video game sense you can take what you got on that machine and use it when playing poker in another area in a game. You can "store" the hand you got at those slots and use them on the poker table at any time.  
3. You can win "luck coins" sometimes. Say you are playing the slots and a blue coin comes out- a less common thing, it's a lucky coin and if you bet with it you have higher chances of winning.    
4. There is a vending machine that produces tokens. You put 50 cents into it and get a random thing. If you get a horse token you can bet on that horse. The gambling game uses a horse race that way. If you get a deck of cards then you can play a free round of poker or blackjack. You might find a memory game deck of cards or some sort of card game. You could get a magical coin. You could get a lucky coin. You can get a token to play any board game. If you get all of the chess pieces you can then play chess from then on. Get all of the pool balls and there you go, you can play pool from then on. There can be more than just a vending machine that gives you all of it. There can be special machines that produce them instead of coins. Like a set of tokens coming out of a slot machine. I would say those are less likely to win but if you do you get more of them at once.  
5. There are a set of arcade machines with games you can play, per coin.  
6. The game paces things out with video game time. Early in the day one thing, later, another. Sometimes a thing only happens once every few days. However the game could be set in a Las Vegas style like city. The player can adventure around and look for what they want exactly. Flyers and things can help them around. Things that say what's going on and where. Some places are more advanced containing the more difficult or less commonly known games like "hearts," or "rummy."  
7. Maybe you can cheat in the game but if you are caught there's hell to pay!  
8. The game can be very two player friendly. Whether in competition or helping each other out. With a whole online world of people going round. You could get a high quality suit- one the other players know was expensive. You could even become successful enough to buy a casino or create a new one. That would be one end objective. A problem of regular gambling games is that the money you win isn't worth anything. It is video game money. You only imagine you won a lot of money. But where that money goes, my idea makes it worth something. If you have gained access to any game then you may invite other players who haven't earned it yet. Like they can't play (this) game because they haven't gotten it yet, but in the online world of it if you have won it then you may invite another to play it with you.  
9. With what all is possible : dominoes, bingo, roulette, poker, black jack, hearts, rummy, crazy eights, which are all gambling games, the game doesn't have to be limited to those. They could have parts and pieces apart like "connect four," or "battleship." That is, in a non copyright infringing way.  
10. Winning = experience points, and the more you gain the better your chances are at winning the more difficult games. There are tables of professional players that are hard to beat at first, but as you level up you can then face them with greater success. Each game within this game would provide you a certain amount of experience points if you win. If you win an easy game, not so much, if you win a difficult game, you get more experience points.  
11. In an online setting you can invent a game. You set out the rules, how to play, and then it is available to all the other gamers. A set up configuration would be required by the programmer. It could be a video game that possibly produces some great card games. Could also be a board game based thing. And it can all be graphically customized and promoted. The player who makes the game would love it to be popular.  
12. Including a fortune teller thing. They tell you your lucky numbers and places. They might say about what time of the day you are more likely to win big (so the player knows when to bet big.) The game might have some imposter fortune tellers, while others are very dependable. So visit the right psychic, or put a quarter into the fortune telling machine.  

## Simulation Games  

1. A true city simulator is based on real cities. From New York to Hong Kong, you build upon what is already there. You can go into the past of a city too and see just how different things turned out when you get to modern times.  
2. A very future based city maker that includes all sorts of new tech. You could have settings like "cyberpunk" or "alien contact."  
3. In a city maker you can include theaters and concerts. The better your city is, the transportation, its attraction, brings in the best talent. Or the best sports team if you invest heavily on a stadium.  
4. You control the laws in the city. You give rights too. You come up with regulations and things that bring fines. You can be the judge and jury in the game and the authority behind it. It could involve detective work. So you do things like put up cameras, form teams, and ask around. You can choose what to focus on, whether a small crime or a really bad one.  
5. You take an occupation in the game and depending on how many are playing you are sometimes needed. You could choose from a set of occupations that help bring the whole game together.  
6. Putting a college/university in a game makes job performance better. Putting money towards the educational system, too. They are all more competent overall because of it.  
7. You can invest in things that lessen the impact of natural disasters or "preventatives" of all kinds. By contrast you can invest. Buying good equipment, things that last, pays off.  
8. A war simulation. Battleship, Risk, War card game, Chess, all in one. A game where you try to keep good tithes with other nations, gaining allies, hiding secrets like a major new bomb, investing in the military, designing new machinery, until you are confident enough to wage war and conquer. Along the way some sacrifices must be made. You must find out what works well and what doesn't. You can set agendas too. Maybe your objective is to overthrow a dictator. Produce propaganda to help you. Recruit and build your army and so on. I have made an entire book on the premise of becoming the Antichrist in my book "My Antichrist Game or Movie," if that isn't objectionable to you.  
9. A wealth gaining based game. Kind of like Monopoly but truly better and more robust as only a video game can do. Board games can only allow for so much. Always remember the video game versions of these things can do so much more. They don't have to be literal translations. A real board game video game is more like "Mario Party." You have the hotel be built. You don't just place the plastic piece there and say "it's built." You get money for people riding the railroads. You not only control the utilities but you decide what kind of energy they receive (gas, water, wind, solar.) You have more cards than just "chance," and "community chest." Your character token isn't a car or dog but an image of yourself. These are just examples of how Monopoly would translate into a game. You can post things online through it too.  

## Beat 'em up Games  

1. Licenses that I haven't seen in a beat 'em up game, but would be nice : Zelda: the game starts with Link pulling up the master sword from its stone. Then with sword, shield, and a little magic he fights forward against typical Zelda foes. Then there are marvel super heroes, Star Wars ideas out there for a beat 'em up. Perhaps some DC ideas. Horror movie figures without a beat 'em up game and so on.  
2. In a kind of Golden Ax beat 'em up you have a limited stun power. You can't ride on beasts until you stun them.  
3. Riding a dragon to an upper level changes your path and is preferable, if you can manage to ride on it, which is not so straightforward.  
4. A special level where things aren't so much beat 'em up based as arena based. You enter onto the mat to fight in a sort of wrestling or kickboxing way. Or maybe the bosses can be fought in a fighting game way instead, in mixing a genre, like in Street Fighter/Mortal Kombat.  
5. Be aware of the fighter with a knife, if he strikes you it is an immediate game over.  
6. You can call on two shadows of yourself as a special power within the game. They fight for you via AI for a limited amount of time.  
7. There is a special "steal" button in the game. You wear down your enemy to have better chances at stealing from him. If s/he is defeated then you just take. Among the things you can steal depends on the style of the game, knives, wands, weaponry, but more imaginatively a leather jacket that raises your defense.  
8. A bar fight scene. Fight with pool cues, glasses and bottles, against a motorcycle gang, then steal one of their motorcycles.  
9. Power Ups like move around faster, become more strong, create a shadow of your character, jump higher and dive down, rush forward and pounce, and hit harder.  
10. In a fantasy (Golden Ax like) style : having gauntlets for magical punches (imagine a fire boom), a sword in stone (maybe you can only lift the sword if you have the gauntlet), various magical wands, a powerup that makes you like Titan (a giant) with earthquaking power. Calling on summons during this kind of beat 'em up. You can take the armor and cloaks and things to transform your player. In two player mode there are experience points so the player who beats the most enemies gets the most level ups. You can have an AI based second or third player.    
11. You have a number of characters to fight as. Each of them has their own "invulnerability" element. One is invulnerable to fire, another to ice, and lightning, ect.  
12. You can go into shooting mode where the game perspective changes to forward looking and you shoot away. You can only do it once per level or some limited amount and not against bosses. When you enter into the mode a target appears and you shoot at the opponents instead of regular sideways fighting. It could come about with a gun powerup. As well that gun powerup can be of different guns.  
13. An RPG with a beat 'em up element. Fighting in the dark alleys that way.  
14. The enemy boss puts you into "Street Fighter/Mortal Kombat" mode. The characters get larger. You have collected a powerup along the way that gives you a certain fighting move. Maybe two. Like a fireball, a spin kick, like special abilities they have in Mortal Kombat or Street Fighter games.  
15. After you beat the game you get a special "any" character. That is, you can switch between any character as its own character. Or maybe it is that way at the start. You don't pick between three or so, you just flip between them. If it is a two player : player one is always green and player two red (so they aren't confused.)  
16. Weapons and gear : character with a robotic arm. He is the fighter of the game. One with a whip, the long distance fighter. One with mace, short distance. A player with a shield can block and protect- or a protective player otherwise. Whoever picks up the shield will protect the other players. If they are low on energy then that becomes more a priority. Maybe it is then that a magical shield appears. Magical musical instruments are uncommon, however they might be used. Magical herbs might be plucked up and consumed- for higher stamina, energy, magic power, speed, and force.  
17. A circular field that flies over lava, going forward, which you must not fall off of. It also tilts and things that break your balance.  
18. The enemy bosses are fought in a more fighting game (Street Fighter 2 like) style. Fire suddenly appears all around you- fire you must not make contact with, while you fight in an arena around it.  
19. There are moments in which all of your fighters transform. Whatever fighter you have chosen will transform at least once in the game. For example a person becomes a werewolf during a full moon part of the game. Doesn't have to be a bodily transformation. Can be that during a level a magician gets a special wand. So every fighter has their moment during the game.  
20. There is the nuisance of an enemy that keeps coming back together. Unless you double down on beating it then you'll have to face them again, perhaps in a more powerful form than before. 
 
## Shooters  

1. Space Invaders with a little more to it. After all the ships on the screen are shot down then larger and more difficult ones appear and things like that. Maybe circular going now or with lasers added, for example.  
2. You must get to the end of the level before time runs out. There is a helicopter at the end of the level that will only wait so long.  
3. A first person shooter where the player also puts on virtual reality to fight, making things more like a contra game. You control an alien body or an android or something like that.  
4. In a Spy Hunter (NES) kind of racer : you have bullet powerups and rocket/missile power ups. You can shoot down a helicopter trying to shoot you down if you catch a certain powerup, or else must survive its onslaught. When you go into the diesel truck you come out with a number of special things. You choose which truck you will go into. That way you choose a car that does particular things. Power Ups include homing missiles, spread shots, rockets, ahead-going bombs, backward going oil slicks, speed boosts, and momentary invicibility. You are also allowed to call on a helicopter to help you, once in every level. Sometimes a tank beside a road helps you. There are road blocks you must blast through. It is a whole set of ideas for a new "Spy Hunter" game .  
5. Things in a transformer and mech fashion. There are rocket attachments to collect while fighting, different guns to get- like a four beam laser. It can be very gun centered. Having a boost button to shoot harder. You could have a hookshot to bring your opponent right to you. There is a magnetic area of the playfield. If you manage to get your opponent on top of it they are basically frozen there. Getting out is sluggish. But if you have rocket power then that is more easy to do. The very center is a pit you must not get on top of. You have a power up to blast in a continual circle. You can rain down rockets on everyone. You can select among a few choices as to what powers you start with, buying more if you win and as the game continues. There is a race, flying, and arena mode.  

## Metroidvania Games  

1. For an additional energy bar or greater magic, those kinds of things, there are hidden spheres of different colors. Green magic, blue power, red energy, things like that. Once you find them you just jump inside. You see a kind of thing like electricity flowing around and that thing is added to or enhanced.  
2. Before you can enter into The Great Cathedral, the last area of the game, there is a hall of angelic idols, 8, maybe 12 of them, that must be brought back to life and sent back to heaven. To do so you need the 8 magic balls which are placed in their hands one after another, in any order.  
3. Instead of being an alien hunter (Samus) or a vampire hunter (Simon) hunting  
4. With an evil ritual the antichrist was born. It grew up, came into power, became a wicked ruler. You began as a priest and made yourself into a "warrior priest" that has set out to undo the evil rule of the Devil's Son.  
5. The setting is that you were abandoned on a harsh planet and are trying to find your way out.  
6. Maybe it is in a Myst style. You are always looking for clues. Something is leading you on. You are in a mysterious place and the more you learn the more the world opens itself up to you.  
7. The last area that you enter into is "the devil's mouth." It is like a devil's head with its mouth closed until you beat the rest of the game. When you have gotten everything done then that mouth opens and you go into the belly of hell.  
8. At the start of a game you see a demonic statue. Slowly throughout the game it changes form. It represents something new and better, something Holy. The demonic statues' bat wings change to bird wings. The horns change to a halo. It goes from black to white. Its blood tears change into water tears, and at last the tears are gone.  
9. You have safe passage through so long as you do not hit or attack anything, in certain areas at least. If you do then trouble will double!  
10. In an online setting there are enemies that you can play as. I once saw a Super Mario World hack where the second player can control the enemies. This could be done in certain ways in all kinds of genres of games.  
11. Whole body transformations are required to go to certain places. You have to have gained the body of an angel for an upper heavenly area. The body of a devil for the game's hell area. The swamp thing for the swamps, a fairy in its realm, a ghostly spirit for the graveyard and so on.  
12. Here are some enemy ideas : a jester that fools around with you. S/he taunts you throughout the game, always managing to escape. But a "stay still" weapon finally allows you to defeat it. A dirt cloud enemy. Vaguely a spirit. They are especially prevalent in a dusty region. Could be a graveyard area. A skeleton throws its head at you which is full of needle spikes.  
13. "Death Falls" is an area with a large skull that has a waterfall coming from its mouth.  
14. There are antanas that show electricity around it. That can serve different purposes : it could energize you, it can have either the ill or good effect of making you something different. It could either harm or help you. Could be a transport or save point. It is like a tesla coil sort of thing. The electricity could be of different colors so the player knows what it does.  
15. In ball form you can drill, make yourself a kind of bullet, lay egg like things that bring helpful life, go into the water all you want, become a kind of saw, have spikes to let you climb walls, swing on certain things, and integrate into a sphere-wheel like vehicle.  
16. Tossing the right thing into the mouth of a large skull gains you entrance. Until then you are blocked from proceeding. Could be a monster skull too. Could be different looking skulls each requiring you to shoot or toss something into its mouth.  
17. There is a pool of lava that you can only cross with an ice beam. The thing is you have to point and shoot into it for over a minute before it all becomes ice.  
18. There is a power that grows over time. Represented as an orb. The further you go in the game the more power it emits. You can take its power at any time. And there might be a number of these. But if you are going to beat the game you are going to need the most power possible.  
19. You collect power packs for a new suit. You cannot use it until all of the packs are placed in.  
20. There is a lot of customization to your power suit. Lots of attachments, and you are kind of like an electrician/mechanic in the game adjusting the wires just right, and the electronic components- the magical futuristic ones. Electronic parts in a video game sense over a real world sense- easier to learn, connect, and put to use. Like "generate more power towards" based on your power availability. "Save reserve power towards," use power ups in the game for (this), and so on.  
21. Energy increasing spots need to be charged up before they can be used. When they are charged they are like a field of energy you enter into to increase your health. You will know when they are fully charged when a little square dot goes from red to green on the map.  
22. For a really grotesque effect there can be a head on a chain instead of a Mario-related ball on a chain. To make it less grotesque it can be a vampire or ghoul head on a chain.  
23. As is common in Metroidvania games you can only enter certain areas under certain conditions. This condition could be that you have to transform into the undead to enter into their realm. When you die you can sluggishly go by the ordinary living realm. But once you get to the dead realm you can move about very freely. Maybe after a while you become better at both. Like becoming a "living undead."  
24. You become better and better at an area. At first you go around less mobile but the spirit of any area enters into you over time and after a while you can fully and more capably go around any area, automatically so, after being there a while. You can have a de-curse meter for this. The bar starts out full but gradually decreases just by being some place and once that bar totally depletes then going around that area becomes easy.  
25. There is a mysterious bridge you cross over again and again. Late in the game you discover that the bridge is gone. By falling instead of crossing you enter into the last area of the game. Other over-time things : there are hanged people (skeletons on a rope) that come to life later in the game. They grab their rope and carry it wanting to hang you. Graveyards slowly open up in the game. You can enter graves/tombs when they do. The light of the sun slowly decreases like a very slow solar eclipse. The more it does the more monsters come out. Your last battle is under a blood red moon. Demonic idols slowly come to life. Eventually they do and become an enemy.  

## Any Genre or Almost Any Genre As Well As "Others"  

1. Possible enemies : give something wings, something that hasn't been given to them before. For example, skulls have had wings in games. Even large eyeballs have been given them. What would you give wings  
2. Getting soundtracks from previous games in the series and the current game as well. So, instead of playing the game you might play the music instead.  
3. Randomizers are popular among gamers even though actual game makers don't ever make them. A lot can be learned about what gamers want with the games they make themselves- such as randomizers. A randomizer takes every little thing in the game and shuffles them up. It gives you certain objectives like "collect all of this," and "defeat these" to beat the game.  
4. Here's a funny idea : a pac man game except instead of the yellow pac man a big head. Just a big human head that gobles up the dots. Instead of some ghosts chasing you other human heads do. One an angry head, kind of more aggressive, one more shy perhaps, another slow and dumb looking, then the smart one (of course he's wearing glasses) to include.  
5. You are against gods. You are trying to become the ultimate god. You have gods to defeat in the game- like eight of them maybe similar to Mega Man. The rain god, the fire god, earth god, ect. And when they are all defeated then you defeat the central god (Zeus perhaps) to take over the entire world as the highest and ultimate god.  
6. An enemy spider that has spears for legs.  
7. Stay away from nests, especially dragon ones, or you'll be attacked by their mother. Try to avoid hives. Some animals have rabies, certainly avoid them. Never bump into a grave. Avoid the festering corpse that has The Plague and so on.  
8. A buying system that combines colors. You have the main colors : red, yellow, blue, as coins. Even though the item you are buying isn't red, the cost is a red coin (of a certain amount of them.) Then there are the purple products- they cost a red plus a blue coin also of a certain amount, balanced.  
9. There are games in which you are changed to something else : like a pig in the NES game Willow, an eggplant in Kid Icarus, or an imp/pig in Final Fantasy. How would you use the idea  
10. When you are about to die, when your energy level is nearly depleted, you hear a heartbeat sound and things all around get big/small/big/small. You have to stand still to recover.  
11. A "toy master" job class or character from whatever genre. They use : dice, kazoos, toy musical instruments, balloons, action figures, dolls, complete puzzles while finding different pieces, ride in hot wheel locking vehicles (the imaginative kind), and improve health and stats with candy. The dice can involve a lucky throw for a certain power, the dolls can become animated to help you. A dragon toy can come to life and fly you around. Completing a puzzle gets you a treasure. Hot wheel looking cars just look cool to ride with. The weapons for the character can be things like sling shots, boomerangs, and magic bouncing balls.  
12. A scythe like the one death has, as a weapon. It moves around like a boomerang. Maybe it causes death on those it hits.  
13. Different color ideas are always a good way to go. To have different color arrows, different color powerups, different color coins, different color suits, different color potions, and so on and so on.  
14. There is a field of flowers in the game and while you cross it fairies appear from all over the place. Crossing past it for a while you find yourself in a really strange but wonderful place- a place different from the rest of the game.  
15. The energy/magical recovery area is through a pipe smoking shaman. He offers you his pipe and you smoke together for a moment.  
16. Just by crossing flowers you gain a scent that wards off enemies. If you cross a swamp though it will attract enemies.  
17. A save point can be a gravestone. Like in a platforming game, once you reach the gravestone it serves as a halfway point, a place you return from after you die.  
18. Hands stick up from out of the earth, warning you to not move. When they go back to the ground, move. When they are above, stop. Trees with faces and eyes that you must only move forward when their eyes are closed. Things like that.  
19. Acid spewing dragon. Skull head spewing acid. Zombies turning into toxic puddles. Skull head with laser eyes.  
20. Not quite a centaur but one without the head. A headless horseman centaur. It throws heads at you.  
21. It rains spears.  
22. A wand that shoots out crystal shards.  
23. A boosting power for a sword (activated by holding down a button) causes a powerful light to cover the screen. It destroys enemies but also has an effect on your own health.  
24. Auction off your stuff. Having a gang of traders instead of trading at shops, having your items improved with gems. Although it doesn't improve your weapon it sells better. Gathering special wood to sell to carpenters or special food for restaurants. Selling to black smiths. Things rise in value over time. Seeing a list of what non playable characters like so that you know what you can find to sell them. Having a large number of shops, each which buys certain things from you, such as books. And shopping around because some places pay more than others.  
25. Things of gambling : a lotto scratcher. They can be based on previous games. Like if it was with Final Fantasy could include summons. Maybe you could only use those cards during a battle. You have dozens of the things and once in a while they are a great help. The scratchers could be split up into : money, summons, weapons, items, treasure, so you can buy what you want a chance at getting. You might find a street side gambler with dice or cards or other things. Maybe each town has their own kind. One town has a dice guy and another a black jack thing. There can be raffle tickets too. The more you do to help others in the game the more tickets you are gifted.  
26. A crystal ball that has a skull inside. It is like a medusa thing but that instead of her head. If you look at it you will turn into a skeleton. Maybe it can be a weapon.  
27. A game can have a speed running setting, a randomizer setting (everything totally mixed up with free roaming and certain objectives), a full story or abridged story setting, choice of a main weapon before you start playing (imagine Ryu from Ninja Gaiden using a whip instead of a sword, for a rough example.) And even a ROM hack mode sort of thing. The speed running settings could include : complete game, time limit, levels of difficulty, certain rules in place like a "no hit run," and the game can post records from people all over.  
28. What does the game do when you leave it on overnight Some games have things occurring all the while. You set options for what you want the characters to do while you are away and return with a surprise. How would you use that idea You could get hard to obtain experience orbs that you can level up with while you, yourself, are resting. You can have something to cook. Some magic potion or something cooking in a pot. When you wake up and start playing again it'll be finished. Or, you could have a weapon recharging.  
29. Going about it wickedly in some ways. Instead of "Greek god" summons, having literal demons from the Chrstian pantheon. Having a demon job class. Being the merciless king in the game always struggling to maintain his/her power. Including demonic idols. If you want more ideas on how to create these kinds of games see my book "My Antichrist Game Or Movie," a thick book covering all those kinds of ideas under my name "Lucifer Jeremy White." It is a FREE ebook and in the public domain, just like this one!  
*Then there are other books of mine under the name Adam Jeremy Capps. "The Game Makers Bible," "The New Video Game Idea Book," and "Making Great Video Games," all free and in the public domain. I am here to help.*  
30. A skeleton that you give food to and when you do it eats it, then something else comes out of the other end, something better than before. It could be a sitting skeleton that you put something (not just food) into its hands. Or in a racing game you just drive through the skull and come out of it with something better. Then, there could be a giant skeleton that picks you up and eats you, for better or worse.  
31. A death swamp where ghost heads pop up like bubbles.  
32. If a giant monster's head licks you then you will transform into something strange. In a beat 'em up it could be in the background. In a racing game a sort of obstacle on the side of the track, in an RPG just an annoying thing and so on. I believe the idea has been used in RPG games.  
33. An enemy made up of lightning bolts- like the edged S shape ones. He throws them out from his own body.  
34. As food for thought : Emergency race-against-time themes : you have to get somewhere in a car, fast. You have to find something fast. You have to get in and out fast. You have to warn someone in time. If someone eludes you then you are going to have to deal with them later. You anticipate that a natural disaster is about to occur. A negative powerup (powerdown) item shortens the time you have left on the stage. An area is killing you (you can only be in the heat or cold for so long.) Something is coming after you and you must get to somewhere safe before it does.  
35. The way you die determines the game over sound effects. If you die in a fire it sounds especially awful. If you die over something simple then the music kind of mocks you.  
36. A dragon that breathes out fire skulls.  
37. A fat bellied giant that has little monsters coming out of its mouth. He looks at you, pats his stomach, then they come out to try to capture you. If they do, then the giant will eat you.  
38. Out of a giant head comes a smaller head, out of it comes another small head, and from it yet another.  
39. Create art, text based things, and videos from the game in a rom hack style, except integrated into the game. For example you can put in your own text, have the graphics move a certain way, adjust as needed to create them. Then you just screen capture the stuff and share it with others.  
40. And a series for your franchise to do the above, such as "Final Fantasy Video Maker," or "Mario World Studio," to make and share videos as described above. Other ideas could include 8/16 bit music makers along with some graphical integration to them. They are things consumers are really wanting.  
41. Having more than one boost button. Normally in a game you only have one. In this game you could boost the weapon in two different ways having two different effects.    
42. Having a diverse amount of coins. Coins determine what you can buy. That, instead of numbers/amount. So when you find a coin in some place, say by smashing a pot, then it will be its own treasure. A treasure chest gives you a particular item. A coin does too in this case. You could add a purple coin if this doesn't fit entirely. That one can literally buy whatever- and the player knows how to get them anyway.  
43. Coins can be attached to a powerup. They can either be sold for something or used as such. Coins can have MP points. Like a 5 MP coin gives you as much magic power. A 5 HP coin can be there too.  
44. Consider putting old video games you have created (whoever you are) in the public domain. First, they are probably not going to continue bringing in a great revenue anyway, and second, they could serve as advertising. Since no one just puts their old stuff into public domain you would probably have many companies reproducing the game- and that is both good advertising and serves the popularity of the franchise. Also consider allowing anyone to make a certain thing based on your franchise. They can make any doll they want of one of your characters, for example, but only that. Free advertising! You could have an approval stipulation so that nobody cheats ("it's a video game doll or an action figure doll!")  
45. As for snakes : yellow and red and you're dead, red and yellow and you're mellow. That was a thing I was once taught about snakes. It means if the first stripe is yellow then it is harmful but if the first stripe is red then they are harmless. In a game that would mean totally staying away from one but fighting the other is okay.  
46. Slime is a really tricky matter in the game. Some game types cannot do without slime. Especially RPG and Adventure games. Here's the idea : there is yellow, blue, and red slime. They are always gravitating towards another color. When they make contact they form into one, becoming both more difficult, larger, and their color changes. Each color can only be defeated a certain way, each their own. If yellow touches blue then a large green slime is made. If blue and red, purple- which may need magic of a kind to defeat. Fire Ice Lightning  
47. A better version of everything. One thing among others that stands out. The idea can be used for about anything.  
48. I don't know why LCD (calculator tech) games never have any color. I mean my LCD alarm clock comes in red, not just black like on a literal calculator. Blue and green are available too. Color can mean a lot of things in any game. It makes one graphic mean something else.  
49. I always like to share my ideas for a video game controller that has light based buttons. The four typical action buttons on one can each put off different colors of light. In four diamond shapes. And there would be a text based bar on the upper part of the controller informing you of things. There would be a little switch on the back that changes everything. Maybe there could be a little screen in the middle or an attachment for one. They would be their own games apart from the console games. Companies can provide little mini games that way such as from way back when : the old Atari stuff, 8 bit games, ect. So your controller can be used in a portable fashion as well. Unlike the Nintendo Switch though the console power isn't hindered by it. The game pad of all gamepads would be used for far more than just video games whatever it is you want, there is an attachment for it. Game companies that sell packaged gamepads each with their own unique side features. Game pads that are also radios, power banks, portable gaming, music players, toys in some way, remote controls with smart switches, security cameras, motion detectors, printer hook up, 3D printer connection, charged in various ways, wi fi enabled, internet surfable, a mouse/internet enabling attachment, and so on.  
50. Giving the console a flip up screen. Just a small six inch screen that folds up and serves to help you while playing your game. Or a control pad that has the same thing. Not some cumbersome Nintendo Wii-U controller either. Just a low power draining simple small screen.  
52. The game switches you between two characters. One evil, one good. One a villian, the other a hero. One a warlock and the other a Paladin. Something like that. So the perspective changes entirely. For a while you are doing good trying to stop the character you are about to become. It is like playing chess with yourself. Only one will win in the end though. So what were you all along Good or evil  
53. A roll of magic tape in the game. Different colors do different things. They are represented as a roll on top of the screen. The more you place the narrower the roll becomes. They can be used as squares for magical doorways, can be "no pass" things, they can emit upward going magic (which can restore energy, capture things, debilitate, or have you rise upward), and any number of other things.  
54. Some random stuff : A powerup that makes you a rocky character (like "The Thing" from The Fantastic Four), or beefy, one that makes you icey, rigid and sharp, and one that makes you fluidic. You are powerful as fluidic. Just slow going. It may be a curse in the game. A magic candle in the game makes you a living fire thing. You can toss fire then from your very body. Nothing can touch you. A nuisance can be that your feet turn into bricks. Maybe you land on top of some bricks that glued you to them. You have to walk around awhile before they come off. I think glue is an underused thing in games.  
55. Including an arcade of games that the players made themselves. Nothing over fancy, but something like 1980s era games. It could be a money making thing for those who make them (at least with video game money.) That would be through a game engine. Will Nintendo ever go beyond Mario Maker  
56. Basing the game on different decades. The first level or area is 1950s- or if you want you can go way back to the 1920s, through the 60s, the 70s, 80s, and so on. How really- just look at toys to know. In the 90s were pogs, implementing them, a talking teddy bear for the 80s. Stick in some 80s arcade games if you own the franchises. They had moon shoes when I was growing up. Then that thing with a ball and a disk around it to hop about on. Skateboards were super cool in the 1980s. A slippery slip and slide. A hopping around Light Worm. Light bright like lighted images. Something sort of like Rainbow Bright or Care Bears (if at all without getting you in trouble with copyright stuff.) Troll dolls for putting in an 80s thing. 90s super soaker gun. One of those kids bicycles that have three wheels. You get the idea. Could be just for some inspiration. You don't even have to outright say that each world is based on a decade. Just include elements of them per world.  
57. Using split screens for all kinds of multiplayer modes. In a platforming game it is especially helpful. And you can push a certain button to bring another player where you are. They can choose to do so with their own button press, or deny the other player by not doing so. As for you, you can go right where they are whenever you want.  

## Software/Hardware Centric Ideas  

1. I have an idea for a magical calculator, an "occult calculator." Inputs include numbers for numerology, elements (earth, air, fire, water), horoscope figures, time of day, colors, definitions of angels and spirits (demons if you want), and various other things. Output includes tarot cards, numerological answers, magic symbols, choice colors like for candles, mini spells tailored to exactly what you want, "enochian key" stuff and whatever else. Has a robust fortune telling element. The magic eight ball, lucky numbers, horoscope, stuff like that. What a tool to gain!  
2. Let me suggest a future. A future where games are no more physically based. People can hack into them and things. During the 1980s there was the video game crash that occurred because so many games were just horribly and cheaply made. Nintendo put up standards to bring about quality from games. Later the Playstation had behind it both quality and quantity. There was a time when games had to be licensed but maybe the most powerful move would be to bring things back into any-game-allowed mode. Anyone can freely make games for the system, again, like it was with the pre nintendo consoles. Programmers are not so fully corporate based. There are individuals and small teams out there which make good games. Sure there would be a lot of crap but there would be a lot of good stuff too, just by odds. There would be people fully dedicated and involved to make a good video game. So maybe the next big console would be free to make games on, entirely free. Just think of all the major programmers it would draw in too. Make games free on this one Take full earnings from it But there is one caveat : the hardware has to be comparable to the most powerful systems out there.  
3. Having color lights for the action buttons. They shift colors. If one lights up green which was previously red, that means something like "something has opened up," or "something is now available." You mean "when you see the purple light come meet me." If a color comes on you can escape. Like in an RPG and you are told you have a limit break available, but this controller will turn on a light when it is. If one lights up then something special is nearby. A flashing red light means danger. The lights can dim too. The possibilities are limitless. Adding to that something : having four lights on the console itself. They come in a D pad/cross configuration. The game pad has two different D pads and this is for the second of them. It all adds to what is already there. Let's say that you have gotten the compass in a dungeon. It will then guide you by lights. In a sort of maze, the console will show "up equals green/go," but when red, stop. Then it will say, "left is green." The console lights don't always have to be connected to that D pad however. It could be just a yellow light going in a circle : up, right, down, left, and back again, showing what time of the day it is. 1 to four red lights can be your energy level or power level. The less red you have the less health you have. Even a subtle effect like that could be good to have. When all four lights flash green it means you can enter some place. Four red lights flashing means "don't go there." Your characters can be of different colors and switching between them is with the D pad and its color shown on the console. Menu items can be flipped through. The red page, green page, two others, the light on the console shows what the D pad equals. A cross ever on the screen shows you what does what when it is a certain light.  
4. Some ideas will always be just fine in LCD form ("calculator tech.") While some will never work well in that format. I remember having a very good Sudoku LCD game. The thing lasts forever on a button cell battery. No bells and whistles were needed. Likewise card games, slot games, Tetris, and certain other games go just fine into the form. But what can be added to LCD games Nintendo made their Game and Watch LCD games dual screen. That was a good one. The earliest handheld games were LCD. They even had a switchable cart in some of the earliest ones. Tiger released a headpiece version. While it was not well received it proves that people are always trying to take this tech and make it better. I have two favorite LCD games : the first was my Zelda watch. Not a regular "Game and Watch" but the literal watch version. The second was Konami's Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, a rectangular green LCD game that was a lot of fun.  
5. I have always been fond of the idea of taking old tech and making it better as in modern times new things can be introduced. The technology that was abandoned can be gone back to and made better with modern means. Take the Power Glove. The main reason why it didn't work was because the technology cost too much. So they had to downgrade it. Things trivial today, the motion sensors, which now can be done easily and cheaply. Then there is the thing of modding old games. A game could have been good overall but just one thing was keeping it back. So that thing was improved. I watched a playthrough of Willow and a review. That was a good game on NES besides some bland and repetitive graphics. Everything in the dungeons looked the same adding to confusion. I guess someone may someday do the simple act of colorizing it a bit. That's all that that game really needs. It is a good time for retro gaming in fact. Something new and interesting is always coming up such as modding consoles, new games being made for very old systems, a new controller for a very old system, games being released again on new consoles and so on and so on. Software is even coming out that makes making games for old systems much easier.  
6. Adding new technology to games apart from the regular (the regular being a console and regular controller) is a thing you may like to consider. For example how the Wii added motion controllers. How the Virtual Boy added its own tech. Some of them fail, yes, but some of them succeed. Whose to ever know if it will or not. The art of new ideas for these mostly comes from just considering tech overall. What tech is there that has not been used yet to help gaming What outer thing could really add to the quality of gaming  
7. **A History of Video Games : The Beginning.**  
A modest little pong arcade machine was set up in a store so long ago. Later they thought the thing broke. It wasn't working when they returned to it. But the problem turned out to be that too many quarters were stuffed into it. That was the first arcade machine. It led to a very profitable business. So we had a period where any game that could be made was made and too many bad games were being made. In a market with so many bad games the market crashed. What was once a great industry suddenly fell apart. That was in 1983 and was largely attributed to the Atari 2600 game ET, as so much was expected of it, let alone on Christmas, but from it being such an awful game people just lost faith in gaming. So Nintendo would soon come out with their Famicom. When bringing it to the west they knew very well about the video game crash and what caused it. And so they made their console more VCR looking. They called it an "entertainment system" instead of something like a "video game system." They included a toy robot to use besides, doing what they could to separate them from appearing like another dumb video game thing. They even had their earlier game boxes presented in game pixel graphics instead of illustrations that would mislead gamers. And finally they established rules to ensure games would not be rushed or cheaply produced. They had quality control over the games for their NES. Most importantly Nintendo simply made good games. Revolutionary games, too. They inspired even better games. They introduced the D pad for a controller, which did a lot for games at the time. Before long more people recognized Mario more than they did Mickey Mouse. This led to a very special period in gaming, one that I can attest to. Nintendo products were everywhere. Magazines, toys, cereal, trading cards, you name it. Where Nintendo really succeeded was with their characters.  
The next big thing to come was the 16 bit era. The Genesis (Mega Drive) was released a little time before the Super Nintendo Entertainment System. It was the first competition that Nintendo had. It was geared more towards adults. It had far better graphics than the NES did. They came up with a good mascot in Sonic. They presented themselves as the more mature alternative. They had a nicely shaped controller even though all they did was add an extra action button. The Super Nintendo would be released shortly after and quickly enough gained the greater market. Its controller had four action buttons in a square pattern and the upper L and R buttons. Such a thing just had more imagination to it than the simple addition of one extra button as with the Mega Drive. The SNES also had Mode 7 in their games. It allowed for a 3D like thing in their games which the Genesis lacked. It was more powerful overall besides the processor speed. But SNES games were simply better with graphics. They might have done just as well with lesser graphics, but who knows. Because their Game Boy was very underpowered compared to Sega's Game Gear or Atari's Lynxx, yet did remarkably better than either. SNES games were astonishing compared to the NES. My introduction to it came from a store display of the machine running Super Mario World. Back then it was actually true for gamers : these graphics were quite impressive. Good old games never die. Especially with this era of games they are returned to again and again to this day. They were just rich enough in look and content to continue forward for who knows how long.  
Nintendo had a few problems with Sony. They turned back on a deal with them to create a disk based add on for the SNES. Sony was interested in this project. You could see it was something they were interested in and worked on with interest. Nintendo however decided against releasing that disk based add on and as a result Nintendo's greatest competition was born. They took what they were working on to create their own system. If there's such a thing as Karma then this is it. I think it would just as well be named the Sony Karma. The Sony Playstation, as opposed to the Nintendo Playstation, would soon be released after that. The youngsters who grew up Nintendo fans could no longer grow with Nintendo. They remained a child centric company. Besides their newest system, the Nintendo 64, used carts. That was good in some ways but over all a bad choice. The games cost more for one. And had a great deal less space to work with. Content on CD was so much more robust even though it required rendered graphics. They were certainly cheaper to produce as well. Nintendo also lost one of its greatest franchises to Sony : that is, the Final Fantasy series. The controller for the Playstation didn't add much. They went with a more 3D feel though for their 3D games. As opposed to a flat controller. Nintendo had a good idea for their controller but it was done in the wrong way. It had three hand places. Their logic was that games were either going to use the D pad or the thumb stick. Sony would follow suit without missing a step. If it works with Nintendo then why couldn't they simply add it to their own They had a better thumb stick in fact and decided on having two of them, centered better overall. Sony also had less rigid rules for their game makers and as a result more games were made for it. It has been said before that Nintendo awoke a sleeping giant. Nintendo though would go on to have good successes, especially in the portable field where they dominate the market to this day. And the Wii did very well, that and the Nintendo DS are their top sellers in fact (their newest system the Switch might take the top spot soon.) And there's no shortage of people saying that the Switch is their favorite all time system. They had to recuperate money lost from the Wii-U fairly recently. They found it easily enough done by releasing "mini" systems and licienicing a few of their franchises. Companies like Nintendo (and Sega, Capcom, Konami, ect.) could live off of their old games if they wanted to. The NES and SNES mini sold very well. Nintendo however is not in the retro gaming market, as they have said.  
8. **The future of gaming : What is to come ?**  
That is just so hard to predict sometimes. I would never have guessed that Nintendo would have made the motion controlled Wii the way that they did. They are geniuses I can't figure out, because I am not quite as smart as them. That's understating it. Nintendo announced a controller that would be radically different and we were all guessing and speculating what that would be. Then they revealed what it was and it could probably be true that not one person could have guessed what it was going to be : the Wii remote, that is. Then we all do the same thing with consoles. What will the new console look like Then Microsoft comes out with something highly simple : a rectangular cube shape for their XBox Series X and Sony with their more "router" looking console, as some describe it. So I can't say what the future will be but I can go over what will be *possible*.  
AI is the best place to start. What would be among the coolest of things is that maybe someday you will be able to feed AI information as to what game you would like to be made. It is like a movie script provided to the AI to create it. The AI then produces a movie based on it. That doesn't seem too far-fetched to me. It describes the scenery, okay, it makes the scenery look that way. Says who talks and in what mood and so on. With games it is a little more complicated. It could at first be partially possible. Like in a game making program you can type stuff out about what you want done and it will do so, while things like graphics are partially helped as well. To type in "make a brick on grid (  )," or "a row," "they walk," "if hit use (  ) animation." And this auto generation can be added on and improved over time.  
Old LCD games are being replaced by digital screen games. Nintendo's Game and Watch is a perfect example. Instead of having LCD games it has old Nintendo games on them with a digital screen. I have also seen an Organ Trail and UNO card game doing the same thing. Then these micro arcade machine games as well for things such as Frogger, Pac Man, Qbert, and Tetris. All digital screens. Games that once took an arcade cabinet and CRT screen now just the size of your hand. I really like the idea. As a kid I always liked things like Monopoly as an LCD game. To have the same thing in "16 bit" format with a digital screen is just awesome. With how many games there are- it is inexhaustible. There was a period in gaming where only new things meant anything. All the while hundreds of good games were being made from system to system into our modern times where they are being appreciated again.  
Emulators are pulling off new tricks. There is one that sharpens the graphics of the SNES Mode 7. It is a noticeable improvement as well. One emulator can make any 2D NES game sort of like 3D. For a while 3D and 2D just didn't get along. For a while things like random battles and pixels were abandoned. But newer games have gone back to 2D in the best of ways. Such 2.5 D games as Octopath Traveler and Evil Live did it very well. Then there is Shredder's Revenge, which returned to the older style of TMNT beat 'em up games. Tetris Effect finally did something new and awesome with the game.  
In talking about the future of gaming we cannot leave out augmented reality. Augmented reality practically produces holograms. It is the same thing really, in a trick sort of way. You see a hologram without one actually being made. But for all your eyes care it is a hologram. That is where Virtual Reality is at. What was once pre conceived as this large head piece is being taken down smaller, just any regular looking eye glasses, thanks to the greater companies of the world. So is it possible that your newest game console will include a pair of glasses And what makes an appropriate gamepad for such a thing If we want to engage all of our senses then we still have a long way to go. Things like touch-feeling gloves, electronic tasting, might be a long way away.  
The illusion granted by augmented reality is astonishing. Take a movie theater. Augmented reality can artificially make a screen just as big. Something like that can replace a TV. It would take less material to produce those glasses. Shipping them around is far cheaper too. People could have a TV wherever they are. Their "movie theater" is wherever they want it.  
I like to call it The Second Reality when I think about the future of virtual worlds. That virtual world will be just as respectable as the real world, if not more. Socializing in the future won't require you to leave your house. And why should it If you can fully see and talk to someone it is just as good. Maybe not in great depth but I know that would be satisfactory at least most of the time, save Christmas perhaps, things like easter egg hunting, a Thanksgiving gathering. Things like that only happen a few times a year however. We see people these days on smart phones from place to place. Just put that into some glasses and you can imagine what it would bring. People then go into this area of reality apart from the real one with such neat things before their eyes. I believe future games will be far more social based than fictional or objective based.  

## The Idea Thesaurus  

I have always felt that thesauruses should be about more than just meaning to words. Here would be an example of that. In fact an idea like this could be used for a much larger book. Ideas help with imagination. The more ideas you have at hand the more you have to work with instead of pulling things up from thin air. The people with the best inspiration have a lot of ideas to work with. This is a kind of don't-forget list too. I have just touched upon the idea here. Making a complete book like this might be a good idea and a good selling one.  
* **Gambling** : Poker, black jack, slots, cards, scratchers, lotto stuff, raffle ticket, betting, winning, losing, odds, bingo, lucky draw, roulette, specialty games.  
* **Money/Economy** : Different value coins, trade, sell, buy, pawn, borrowing, earned, just given you, given you for the sake of your quest, investing, "lay away," renting, increasing value, decreasing value, haggling, stealing, "thief" stuff, winning (especially in mini games), 100 coin idea, 10 special coin idea, gambling, salary, commission, job, reward, gem, pouch, hidden, merchant, bargain, sale, mini game won, from special level.  
* **Racing Games** : vehicles, kart game, regular race, single screen, multi screen, "spy hunter," racing as a separate part of the game, loop, laps, course, untypical vehicles (think Micro Machines, marbles, wave racing, or unicycles), trying to demolish other cars, out running (apart from just other racers), shifting vehicles, futuristic, super fast running, twisting and turning around the track, goal, agenda, ramps, obstacles, weapons, upgrading cars, speed boost, sharp turn, energy level, side repair, real world environments, imaginary environments, spinning out of control, being struck, being stuck, oil slick, booby traps (banana peel), motorcycles, cars, trucks, monster trucks, futuristic vehicles, flying vehicles, floating downward, car turns into boat, riding into sunset, nitro fuel, forested areas, mountainous areas, city areas, snowy areas, rough track, short cuts, lap based, escaping police, road rage, spiraling out of control, the bump mechanic, car blowing up, **powerups:** *hopping over things, faster speed, take down straightforwardly, take down erratically, hone in on, hone in on 1st place driver, placing trap (banana peel), obstruct view, missile, gun, change all other drivers temporarily.*  
* **Metroidvanias** : Maps, gradually able to go further, missiles, bombs, taking powers, aliens, catherdral, goth, great monsters, the grotesque, gothic setting, clock tower, magma area, swamp, pit, eerie strange place, seclusion, upgraded suit, added abilities, abilities taken from enemies, hard to find things, energy increasing room, replenishing weaponry room, swords, old kinds of weapons, peicing together, double jump, downward attack, grapling, bridging, opening with new power, summoning, evil demon, demonic lands, cursed lands, demon returns, vampire.  
* **RPG games** : Modern, medieval, more or less fantasy, towns, castles, kingdoms, caves, mountains, forests, desert, homes, swords, shield, protective gear, offensive weapons, magic, gray, white, black, red, treasure chest, pots, inns, shops, restorer places, items, HP, MP, AP, summons, leveling up, experience points, magic and ability points, new spells per level gained, grinding, up HP and stats, strategy fighting, fetch quests, trading, key item.  
* **RPG Job Classes** : mage, soldier, knight, dragoon, warrior, thief, summoner, barbarian, cleric, monk, blue mage, red, white, black, gray, black knight/dark knight, ranger, berserker, hunter, mystic knight, paladin, sage, alchemist, necromancer, scholar, and weather mage.  
* **Adventure Games** : Chosen One, Hero of (  ), puzzles, dungeons, fields, towns, sages, great sword, tools, health potions, key items, upgraded sword, forests, caves, fairies, fairy pond, magic flute, evil has awakened, pieces of power, proving yourself, destiny, hidden areas, hidden things, further exploration through tools, rafts, spells, burning away, shields, self protection, swinging sword, thrusting sword, sword beam, bow and arrow, boomerang, bombs, icey places, swampy, desert, mountains, temples, refuge, thieves, skeleton fighters, made up creatures, horse riding, climbing, sneaking in, witches and potions.  
* **Mechanics** : Wall jumping, wall climbing, clinging to top, double jump, flip jump, auto jump, thrust sword, swing sword, boost jump, leaping, boost shot, targeting, swing from, fly, float, gravitate, pushed away, pushed towards, slippery, hop, momentary invincibility after getting struck, heavy jump, mid air control jump, hit box, dash, run or walk, tip-toe, the faster character, the higher jumping character, the flying or floating character, the balanced character, sinking into, suits for different maneuvering.  
* **Weapon** : Very weak to very strong, covers as an arch, goes straightforward, goes diagonally, comes from above (may cover the whole screen), a thing tossed like Holy Water, creates a field of fire, comes back to you like a boomerang, extra power if you are at full health, slice, thrust, stuns, fireball, whip, sword, mace, ball, spear, nunchucks, sai, boe/staff, wand, boomerang, gun, rocket, magic attack, freezes.  
* **Tools** : Bottle, net, fishing pole, shovel, musical device, pick up glove, hookshot, lantern, fire producer, bomb, create a platform, change something into something else, can now swim or breath underwater, a raft, miniturize, become flat.  
* **Simplification** : Warping/fast travel, limiting length of cut scenes, digesting things, non-confusing, easily understood, flipping through (like using L and R buttons), giving hints, tutorials, first level gives you an idea of the rest (this is like with the original Super Mario Bros, the first level presented what the whole game was about without a tutorial), if not one way then another (some players are good at doing things one way but other players are good at doing things a different way), minimalism.  
* **Defense** : Shield, dodging attacks, back row has more defense, raising evasiveness, spells such as protect and shell, magic blocking, making yourself invulnerable through an accessory, a new suit raising defense, or armor, enemies being too afraid to fight you, increase of stats, power going around you (circling around you in a way that protects you), safer spots, careful venturing, having a an animal/creature/beast protect you, becoming invisible, scaring away enemies, momentary raise in defense, dashing out of the way, automatic defense, protected against certain things through an item, being immune to something, power to push away, finding refuge, hiding, avoiding danger, through technique, through becoming better at a game (always a pattern to learn).  
* **Attack and Battle** : Hit the red spot, counter attacks in RPG games, hit when they move their shield away, do things in the right order, strategy grid based (as was in Betrayal at Krondor), active time battle or wait system random battle, action random battle (or at least moving around more freely), hard contact, covering different areas (some attacks go straight, some in a curve, others from all around, and some are dropped downward), a bouncy weapon, to peirce, to thrust, to swing, hitting from above and below, fast but weak, slow but strong, and in between, choice between magic and weapons, using futuristic weapons, turning enemies against themselves, hold button to boost attack, team of diverse fighters, targeting, magic assisted.  
* **Reaching new areas** : Through a maze, through exploration, with a special suit, flying there, a raft, a boat, a flying device, a flying broom, a flying carpet, with a rocket, flying ship, flying on a beast or bird, through a key, moving a boulder, bombing a crack, burning down a bush, burning away harmful thorns, by positioning things a certain way, after hitting a target with an arrow, revealed from slashing away shrubs, being guided there by someone, only granted after getting all the orbs (or crystals or defeating all the dragons, ect.), things granting a mini game, requires difficult maneuvering to get to, is conditional shine : star light on something, during a full moon (  ), or place (these) there, requires a power up, with magic powers.  
* **Environment** : Desert, water, cold, mountain, cave, forest, river, lake, towns, kingdoms, houses, mazes, labyrinth, field, thunder and lightning, storms, day and night, double moon, going to the moon, a cavern, a pit, an upper world (like the floating continent or as realized in Kid Icarus or Chrono Trigger), secluded homes, witch homes, Things grow, things change/evolve, the hidden city appears, things go to space, other planets, a land floating above, dark world, light world, new world, ruined world, future world, past world, under the water.    
* **Ride/Travel-on** : Any animal, fictional animals (or creatures and beasts from the real world or otherwise), magic carpet, rocket, air based vehicles like jets, hot air balloon, cars, trucks, tanks, jets, helicopter, boats, submarine, underwater breathing device, air ship, raft, hover boat, with magic power, traveling on moving platforms, anything letting you breath under water, bubbles, moving platform, a big star, you can travel by raising your sword, your flying friend called with a flute, a whole castle moves (like in Final Fantasy 6, or in Final Fantasy 8 how the Garden Centers can become airborne), travel through magic or portals, warp area.  
* **Powerups** : Invincibility, gives you a certain attack, makes you large or small, makes you faster, has you dodge things, adds a new way to attack with the same weapon, makes the regular weapon better, lets you fly, comes from button boosting, comes from combo of buttons, easy to find, hard to find, more powerful weapon than before, upgraded weapon, magic based, repairing something broken, un-cursing, forging, created through gathered things such as metals.  
* **The Strange** : Ghouls, ghosts, goblins, trolls, dark elves, creeps, monsters, the grotesque, freaks, vampires, frankenstein, mummy, skeletons, two headed, headless, four arms, cyclops, centair, evil spirit, witch, demon, haunted house, thing from abyss, swamp thing, toads, mushrooms, Halloween stuff, headless, strange alien, blood moons, "gothicness," cathedral, graveyard, tomb, darkness, imps, jinns, spiders, insects, worms, zombies, storms, bizarre magic, jabberwocky, evil fairy, red devil (maybe like something from the movie Legend), a black sabbath, goat figure like a baphomet, typical Satanic imagery, the very sharp fanged, see monsters, giant squid, spikes and sharp things, weird weapons, fountain of blood, gargoyles, bats, rats, black cats, hand without a body, slime.  
* **Enemies** : Fly down on you, fly, walk, crawl, dash around, jumps around, come apart, come back together, rush, strategic, slow, beefy, large, small, shock you, hurl weapons, blast at you, throw towards you, protected with a shield until they strike, have magic against you, death by contact one way, subdued by another, one weakness, entirely invulnerable, transform, appears from below, are shy, use their own parts against themself, have tricky maneuvering, *enemies of the water : a squid, a swordfish, shark, dolphin, jellyfish, electric eel, puffer, tortoise, crabs, lobsters, sea fish, sea star, sea monster, whale*, comes alive if you touch it (like a statue), invulnerable in some ways, vulnerable in others, has a series of patterns/phases, are multi faceted, has an especially damaging attack, disappears and reappears, turns out they are actually of help, they hunt you down, have a counterattack, they call on help.  
* **Jobs classes in RPG games** : Mages, knights, dark knight, monks, blue magic, thieves, warriors, different races like elves, summoner, and all new ones very possible. *Some ideas for new ones :* enhancer makes old things better, crafter improves things and sets up things differently for you, The Creator summons new things in the game that wouldn't be there otherwise (consider it a "weapon, tool, item, beast, spell summoner," instead of summoning spirits they summon other things.), Job Shifter randomly changes job class during fights (with the desirable ones more likely to be changed into, automatically), Wood Worker uses wood in a number of ways (they can make a magic altar, a tent out in the wild, magic wands), Ritual Magician has powerful magic although it is used in a more complicated fashion, a Fairy job class for becoming a sprite within the game. S/he's useful for getting into smaller areas, flying, healing, opening up lakes, ect.  
* **Spells/Magic** : Fire, earth, wind, water, black magic, red magic, gray magic, and white magic, reflect/mirror, stat boost, faster, slower, poison, flood, earthquake, bolt, tornado, banishing, death, doom, cure, repair, transport, analyze, protect, summon, live again, confuse, beserk/make crazy, float, absorb, take magic from enemy, take energy from enemies, ultimate spells, turn you into something (an imp, a pig), calls on help, boost power of weapons, boost defense of things like shield and armor, are purchased as a scroll, gotten when leveling up, are equipped and learned through AP, are granted at a certain part of the game, are "forgotten then learned again," are drawn out of enemies like it was in Final Fantasy 8, accessories that : double power, cut MP use needed, allows double spells, using two characters to cast one more powerful spell, targeting all of the enemies at once (although the overall effect is weaker), comes from wands.  
* **Items** : Cure, remedy, small to large health boost, stat fixing, one time weapon, limited power, money, sleeping bag or tent for healing, saver items that save you from dying (a thing automatically bringing you back to life), lets you cross a would-be dangerous area (like a balloon over a pit), will blast all enemies on screen, helps you weather wise, found in : barrels, chests, blades of grass, with shovel, with hook, with net, with fishing pole, in bookshelf, caves and tombs, improves tactile play, makes you more versatile, allows escape or transport, keys, bottle, gems.  
* **Story And Themes** : Against a dictator, princess taken, greedy thirst for power, against planetary harm, betrayal, comradery, relationships, sacrifice, overcoming, uniting, from hopeless to hopeful, "where there's a will there's a way," unexpected surprise, gaining the help needed, evolving, saving friends, saving from prison, a split : some follow evil and the others good, gaining support, encountering new team members, times of hiding, times of being found, striving, needing, wanting, grief, happiness, and other emotions, sanctuary moment with planning, time to flee, the departure, the right and safe way through, sneakiness, accomplishing the impossible, the cause, rage and great anger, abominable things happening, discovering, something landing right in your lap that changes things, a side quest to pursue an elusive thing, where your friend or family failed you will not, you awaken in a new bed (the game starts where you wake up. Your destiny is laid out before you), the King sends you out to do something, "for an old friend" to avenge or make up for, restoring a relationship, convincing another (we need your ship, please let us use it. He (the evil king) is on the wrong side of things).  
* **Places/areas** : Town, castle, field, graveyard, forest, glade, dungeon, pit, swamp, ruins, mountains, hills, rocky areas, rivers, lake, ocean, underwater area, sewer, other planet, the moon, another dimension, a world before and after, houses, dangerous places, safe places, item rich places, buildings, neighborhoods, stores, inns, temples, cave, cavern, refuge, healing places, air or upper based, cathedral, gallery, clothing store, alley, beaten down path, cavern, heaven, hell, abyss, basement, meeting place, shrine, hideout, workshop, factory, machinery, tower, church, palace, places of mages, gambling place, auction place, learning area, battle arena, mad scientist place, witches place, meet-yourself place.  
* **Harvesting/Obtaining** : From striking grass or pots, smashing things, book shelf, barrel, hidden gems, metals, elements, fruit from trees, various foods, combining items, capturing, capturing and putting in bottle, using monster parts, chests, extra large treasure chest, from seeding, taken from enemies, paying for the parts or pieces you lack, having it blessed makes it better, by stealing, from drops, just given to you, as earned, is a reward, sparkles in the play field, purchased, from key item, from key, within a cave, found behind a waterfall, found behind a curtain, traded for, produced (like by a witch) from a note, worked on over time, from striking something (like an orb in Ninja Gaiden or a candlestick in Castlevania), abilities taken from enemies, by smashing bricks, from getting a certain amount (like coins), under certain conditions (like getting every coin in a level or you can only have it with enough power), comes after doing a series of things, comes about randomly, found in a special area or place, won in a sort of game.  
* **Special Areas** : mini game, tomb, labyrinth, dungeon, basement, abyss, "hell, heaven, nirvana, valhalla," lower area, hard to reach, tricky to reach, enter using a tool, hidden, out of the way, circumstantial, requires all of something (like the four crystals), in a well, dropping something into the well or the lake, cave, gotten through with a deliberate glitch, environment shifting (consider the pace of these) the first level is the streets and the next have you in the water or running forward on a train, are in places that no one would ever consider, gotten to in a hard to guess way (let's say you can kneel down in the game, you do within a graveyard, for a certain number of seconds), in Final Fantasy 6 Cyan sleeps in the bed of his castle. It must be him that does so. If he does then a special area is triggered. Different characters bring about different things, gotten to with a key, gotten to with a key card, being assisted there by a non playable character.  
* **Typical But Important Elements** : The "tried and true" stuff : Money, leveling up, enhanced random battles (things that improve them where improvement is needed), an upgraded weapon (especially swords), taking your enemies power, well done color swaps, a good story (especially include deceit and betrayal plus a very mad main boss), good music- choose only the best composer, experience points and not just for RPG games, having different playable characters who control differently (some fly, others jump higher), mechanics that are easy to control, cut scenes, being able to skip them, mini games, areas to target on an enemy boss (that red spot for example), the ability to jump, the ability to wall jump and cling to walls, the ability to fly, health boosters, 1 ups, fair difficulty, choosing the difficulty, areas gradually opening up (especially according to tools), using enemies against themselves, lower areas, hidden areas, upper areas, 2D or 2.5 D mode (the option) for an RPG, shops, grass cutting for money, choosing which stats or abilities to increase (magic level, attack power, increase of health meter), the final boss isn't quite done yet, it shifts into a more powerful form, going back in time, having one ultimate weapon or spell, creating things from different pieces and components, day and night cycle, different environments, different places, graveyards and their secrets, shifting environments in a platforming game like little hills coming up from below, a skeleton fighter, choosing between different characters as was done in TMNT games, a shield that deflects little things coming at you, weapons that cover lots of areas, having different weapons while going forward (such as in Castlevania), a double jump, controlling jumps while in midair, attacking enemies by jumping on top of them, including slime in an RPG, musical tools and weapons, a magic flute, a thing to ride on, a skateboard, rolling over the sea in a water jet, going down in a little submarine, a mech suit.  
* **Special Touches** : Day/night cycles, best title screen possible, appearance changes from what is worn, seeing the weapon in a random battle, weather effects, graphics move around when enemies are around and once defeated they go still again, special spots twinkle indicating something is there, junk you collect can be made into something better, if you steal from a shop and return, you will be attacked, attack something enough and it will cause a swarm against you, a larger version of something previous, a thing given wings while the others don't have them, a color swap, a card game or mini game within the game, Mario falling with the wand in Super Mario Bros. 3, having the ultimate weapon made to be yet more powerful, shifting the music sometimes, robust musical score, seeking the very best composer, brainstorming to add a little more to a thing, a less common version of something even if it is just a graphical color swap (but worth more), just the right font, changing the font box, adjusting the game to suit you, a second quest, an unexpected surprise, getting more than you thought you would, an enemy becoming a friend, place to place being different from each other, new abilities o or tools that really open up the world, achievements shown, Making things customizable, great depth, flexibility, lots of characters, amusing and interesting personalities, variety, the unexpected.  
* **Platforms** : Bounce on, travel on, disappearing reappearing, flips around, cannot touch, slippery, quick sand, they spin, you get stuck on, is a cloud you ride, is an enemy you ride, dolphin, bird, flying turtles, one with wings, bricks with wings, created by jumping on something, created from a switch, can be smashed, can be removed, indicate what's inside, a bridge, a safe spot (think Ghosts and Ghouls where the ocean sweeps over you), on a moving raft, boat, train, giant plane, is an elevator, is a winding upward tower, the roof of something, pyramid shaped, sliding down hill, going around in a roller coaster kind of way, can jump upward and through on, can fall down through by holding the down button.  
* **Gun like weapons** : Single shot, spread shot, honing shot, curving shot, blast, explosion, targeting, laser, wide beam, one shot kill gun/bullet, machine gun, grenade launcher, rocket launcher, rifle, pistol, missile, ice beam, stun, taze, wave beam, x ray beam, grappling beam, power beam, *mega man like :* shoots out a tornado, makes things spin around, shoots out bubbles, stops time, slows time, shoots out fire, creates a shield around you, shoots needles, has magnetic effect, shoots out a smashing fist, uses electricity, shoots a drill, shoots a ring, effects gravity, portal gun, wraps around enemy, emits sound that is harmful to enemies, sonic wave, creates bricks, calls on something to help, black hole (sucks in enemies), brings out acid, grabs, brings toward, breaks, makes slippery.  
* **Swords** : Made of gold, silver, electrum (gold plus silver), adamant, copper, steel, aluminum, wood, crystal, mythrill, especially forged, takes time to forge, especially found, rewarded with, circle attack, charge attack, beam coming from, upgraded, sword in stone, in lake, in grave, in tomb, infused with magic, randomly causes spell, breakable, one time use, gradually loses power, only becomes stronger, becomes stronger while leveling up, grows more powerful with lower HP, is as powerful as your HP, assigned to particular characters, are more effective against (  ), are less effective against (  ), becomes stronger with MP, takes from enemies whenever used, aids thief, takes HP from opponents upon striking them, by wielding it you have stronger magic, lightsaber, narrow, broad, long, two handed, short, sharp, dull, cutlass, dragon sword, scimitar, ninja, celtic, viking, claymore, katana, excalibur, rapier, helps deflect or evade, sword good for thrusting, other good for slicing, more or less likely to critically hit.  
* **Types of Characters** : The goofball, the thief, the bossy, the adventurer, the mage, the soldier, the (job class), the fighter, the old and old fashioned, the childish, the child, they mysterious, the fun, the ditsy, the smart, the inventor, the helper, the protector, the lover, the beloved, the royal, the poor, the responsible, the vengeance seeking, the instructor, the training dedicated, magic student, the assassin, the transformer (turns into beasts and things), the "half something half something else," a spirit or ghost, prince, princess, queen, king, plumber, is an animal, is based on an old myth, is a new mix of things (like dragon turtle), someone trying to make amends, ends up betraying you, infused with magic/super human, technician, the fool, the merchant, the scholar, based on pre history (caveman, viking, celt, medieval), an all new creature (like Pac Man or Qbert), elves, fairies, CIA/high level governmental person, the one hunting down things (vampire hunter for example), the child becoming an adult, the person who bugs you, the person always wanting to challenge and outdo you, the jealous person, the person always wanting to be better, a fusion character, secretively a magician or secretly a fairy, the protective mother, father, or grandparent, astronomer, physician, magical physician.  
* **Types of Enemies** : Evil spirited, trying to take over, tyrant, evil magician, evil king, evil queen, spoiled prince, spoiled princess, more or less difficult, is vulnerable in certain ways, only vulnerable when shield is down, must be attacked from above, is insane, is a monster, is a beast, is an alien, is a creature, is a troll, a goblin, dark elf, dark dragon, an animal, a thing, a ghoul, a ghost, a zombie, a vampire, a troll, a wolf man, a demon, uses metal weapons, uses magic, cannot touch, can jump on, must strike or avoid, moves all around, flies, goes towards slow, goes towards fast, leaps around, goes in a pattern, throws things, betrayer, trickster, walks, rolls, crawls, fast, slow, dodgy, grows, splits into two, shocks you when hit, in an area where you can't reach them (and from there they attack), are harmless unless they notice you, try to steal from you, shifts their weakness, can deal with the environment better than you (for you it is slippery, for them easily walked around on), they fall apart but come back together (usually an idea used for skeletal figures), can blast you away with wind, try to eat you, enemies that are fixed into place, enemies that move only a little, are slow, enemies who are fast, enemies who are erratic, the undead, serpentine enemies, water monsters, fish, dogs or wolves running towards you, enemies that always return and more powerful than before, a spy.  
* **A Good Game** : Easily understood, is fun, is amusing, good mechanics- easy to control, does not frustrate, emotionally involves the character, has an interesting story, an engaging story, makes them want to be a part, makes them feel like they have a place in the game, is not just a fetch quest, is fair with its difficulty instead of unfair, does not expect too much of the player, the graphics are good, the music is good, there is a lot of variety, the player can play the game as they choose to, there is a lot of depth to the game (as the genre requires), is not a copycat game, not a clone, is something both new and desired, is novel, might be the very first of its kind, is not overly complicated, is simple enough, has the player wanting to know "what's around the corner," sometimes surprises the player, is rich in items, rich in powerups, rich in weapons, ect., there are lots of reason to explore, lots to find, lots to learn, lots to adapt to, lots to get better through, teaches the player to do better in order that the player can manage the difficulty (like pattern based- if the player just learns the pattern then they can do better than before), does not have to be grounded in reality, is good as a game over a realistic representation of the world, game world might be wonderful (like the Mushroom Kingdom), pulling on emotions- sadness, happiness, exciting, engaging, thrilling ect.  
  
## Conclusion  

I hope to have been helpful, nothing more. This is my version of game making. Being unable to program but having so many ideas it is my part in making a good game. I am not the kind of person who needs credit, who needs to make money from his writings. So don't at all feel guilty for using my ideas for your new game. It is a public domain book. I think it would be very special if someone ever took up this book and added to it. After all, the same is done with video games themselves all the time. There are people more and more that keep old things alive. There are people who improve old games, and those that put their creation into open source form. So certain games are a shared thing. One person adds their own touches to them and another the same. So this book could be called an "open source" thing. Some might choose to sell their new edition while others choose to provide them free as I am doing, and both are fine.  
It has been a narrow guide. It is the kind of book that is naturally small. I have written some others. They are all free and in the public domain as well. They are :  
* My Antichrist Game or Movie under the pen name Lucifer Jeremy White  
* The New Video Game Idea Book under the name Adam Jeremy Capps  
* The Game Maker's Bible under the name Adam Jeremy Capps  
* Making A Great Video Game also under the name Adam Jeremy Capps  

I have written many books in fact. Going on about fifty. They are easy to find under my different pen names :  
* Lucifer Jeremy White (my most used name.)  
* Lucifer Damuel  White (used very little)  
* Adam Jeremy Capps  
* Adam J. Capps (my two biological names are usually for video game idea / creation books.)  

The easiest way to find them are on these sites : Google Play, Archive.org, and Lulu.com. You can find me online too- under my Lucifer Jeremy White name. All of my books are free and in the public domain with one type of them I want to mention : those about Christian Satanism. It has been my beloved project for many years. It encompasses what it would suggest : the gray sided.  

Until next time,  
Adam Jeremy Capps.