# The New Game Makers Bible  
**By Adam Jeremy Capps**  
*San Francisco, 2021.*  
*PUBLIC DOMAIN*  

## Table of Contents   

[The Most Important Elements In Games](#the-most-important-elements-in-a-game)  
[The Best Ideas I've Seen Used](#the-best-ideas-ive-seen-used-in-video-games)  
[Obscure but Good Ideas For Games](#obscure-but-good-ideas-for-video-games)  
[Ideas For Video Games (New) (Contains: Character Ideas, The Possible Setting/Story, Possible Power Ups and Items, Tools/Effects, Weapons and Similar Things, Powers and Magic, Abilities, Other Things, Nice Touches, and Possible Enemies.)](#special-section-the-basis-for-a-whole-new-game-in-many-possible-forms)  
[Good Ideas for Games](#good-ideas-for-games)  
[Bad Ideas for Games](#bad-ideas-for-games)  
[The Success or Failure of a Game](#the-success-or-failure-of-a-game)  
[Contrasting Old Ideas](#contrasting-old-ideas)  
[Game Making Tactics](#game-making-tactics)  
[Having the Most Fun in a Game](#having-the-most-fun-in-a-game)  
[Developing a Theme and World](#developing-a-theme-and-world)  
[Developing a Story](#developing-a-story)  
[Ideas for Story Development](#ideas-for-story-development-and-story-settings)    
[Types of Characters and Their Motives](#types-of-characters-and-their-nature)  
[The Character Motives](#the-character-motives)  
[The Enemies Motives](#the-enemy-motives)  
[The Actual Player's Motives](#the-actual-players-motives)  
[The Most Important Questions For A Game Maker To Find Answers For](#the-most-important-questions-for-a-game-maker-to-find-answers-for)  
[Important things to include in different genres](#important-things-to-include-in-different-genres)  
[The Best Ways to Place Secrets](#the-best-ways-to-place-secrets-in-any-game)  
[The Best Things...](#the-best-things)   
[The History of Some Major Games](#the-history-of-some-major-games-why-they-succeeded-and-how-they-evolved)  
[Two Player Elements in Different Games](#two-player-elements-in-different-games)  
[Choosing a System to Create For](#choosing-a-system-to-create-a-game-for)  
[History and Facts About Old Consoles](#history-and-facts-about-old-consoles)   
[Neat Game Things](#neat-game-things)   
[Choosing a Peripheral to Create For](#choosing-a-peripheral-to-create-a-game-for)  
[On Doing Things That Have Never Been Done Before](#on-doing-things-that-have-never-been-done-before)  
[A Brief History of Early Video Games](#a-brief-history-of-early-video-gaming)  
[The Gaming Community](#the-gaming-community)   
[The Joy of Game Making](#the-joy-of-game-making)    
[The 75 Rules of Good Games](#the-75-rules-of-good-games)   
[The 75 Sins of Game Making](#the-75-game-making-sins)  

---

This book will contain a sort of game making philosophy covering how a good game is made, what makes a game bad, and a ton of ideas for anyone wanting to make their own video game. New ideas are included, too. My approach was to:  
1. Make a book that expands the imagination of the game maker.
2. To go through the best things about any given game.
3. To provide a large amount of good ideas.
4. To elaborate on things that have been done before, for better or worse.
5. To provide a useful understanding of how a good game is made and what makes bad games bad.
6. And just anything else that can help the reader make the best game they can.  

I made this book where it is easy to reference, almost like a dictionary or thesaurus of ideas. As such you can quickly find information on just about any game making thing you want to work on. This book doesn't at all have to be read from start to finish but it will only help.  

And this book may be used freely. It is entirely in the public domain just as I want it to be.  

My background is that I love video games. I love learning about them, playing them, even just hearing about them and what people think of them. They have been absorbed into my thinking for a long time now. I always loved video games but in the past years I have had the opportunity to learn about them online. I've watched video game videos just about all day for the last few years. Videos such as reviews, criticism, top tens, retrospectives, what people deem hidden gems, news, playthroughs, speedruns, you name it. As a kid I sent in an idea to Sega. They wrote back and told me that they felt interested but first I had to sign some papers to accept it, with my idea expressed more. Only I'd change the idea completely and was sent back a letter saying they weren't interested. The first idea was called Skull Brothers. A skeleton with two heads and two powers, one of ice and the other of fire. The second was just some crap about "Dragon Slayer." The movie got the best of me. I think I was ten years old at the time.  
Like any kid I wanted to make a video game. I'd make levels on paper for a new Mario game so strongly inspired by Super Mario Bros. 3. For a lifetime I wanted to make a video game, from time to time. I had tried Python for a while as far as coding goes. I have at least a general knowledge of it but gave up on it. The one thing that stuck with me was writing. Second, I wrote music which I did for years and years. But the one thing I was always good at was writing. So I decided to write a book that helps game makers make great games. That's my contribution. I hadn't found any such books online.  

One excellently done thing in making a game can make every difference. One very bad thing can make it altogether bad. Bad music for example can completely ruin a game. Could make it great, conversely. Frustrating controls are one of the worst things. Some things are so important that if you just focus on them you will make a great game. Maybe not perfect, but a joy to experience nonetheless.  

Be aware that what is on paper may not be good in the game in actuality. A ready example is realism implemented into a game. Things such as easily broken swords and the need to eat food periodically. Things such as that may be real world like but frustrating. People aren't playing games as a real world type of experience. In fact games should be a pleasant escape. Things in fact may not make sense at all. Take Mario Bros. for an example. Think cartoons. Not real life movies.  

Pulling from inspiration is greatly valuable. How you translate that into a game is important. But every idea can be made into a game to greater or lesser effect. That includes every aspect of a game. Like the music, which may have been inspired from some obscure composition or beat.  

Some things must be focused and worked on more than others. They involve the core of the game: the music, graphics, control.  

Copy cat games are never a good way to go. They just produce an ugly twin of its former embodiment. It isn't a one to one copy. In other words you can take all ideas of a previous game, doing them all differently, but collectively they come together in an awful way. So in other words all ingredients must go well together in order for it to taste good. Consider a person making a whole different recipe of a stu. Instead of having beef it has chicken. Instead of noodles it has dumplings. Instead of carrots, celery. All of the ingredients are both better and mix together in choice ways.  

As for inspiration: if you are going to make a game you love, if you are going to love making it, then it should come from the things you love. Think like this, 'If I did (this) it would be done (this) way instead. Star Wars did the Death Star. Star Trek, later, did the BORG Cube. And a favorite lesser known Sci Fi show (LEXX) used the same concept to create "Mantrid Drones."  

Some good ideas are good ideas forever as are and cannot be done differently while staying as such. Some things cannot be done differently. In fact they should stay as are and as long as you are not plagiarizing, that's no problem. For example "HP" in an RPG game. Some plot lines too are the best, like the-villian-was-your-father. Or energy bars, in-game money, leveling up, and so on. They are the basis of great games. Feel free to use them. Don't feel like you are copying other games when you do so.  

For the formula simply look back on the things you've always loved. Those things that stood out, implement them into your game. As such, paint a beautiful picture. If in the meantime something just doesn't work as you thought it would, then focus on something else for a while. If after returning to it and it just doesn't work well, simply abandon it.  

Overall "the proof is in the pudding." What is fun, what is engaging, what is addictive, are the best priorities of a game maker.  
The mood you set is important as well. The "impressions" made should come across effectively. Whatever they are: such as strangeness, darkness, or fun, otherworldly or whatever they may be.  
Polishing a game may be the best time spent on making a game. To go from what was thought was done yet to make it better and better, that even the finishing of it turned out to just be the beginning. You don't want to "overpaint." I mean what is done well might be well enough. The important thing is that you don't change singular parts so much that it no longer blends in with the rest of it. So keep things well together while you are improving on certain elements. Don't treat them so much as singular. Consider if a jump could be a little better. Consider if the story could be tweaked just a little more. Improve the sound if you feel you should. And if anything just feels hopeless- that you thought could be good but just isn't, don't be too steadfast in keeping it.  
Avoid (our version of) mentalites because it is much more fun to create what you want to instead of adding to the tiers of prior fame.  
To go over the most important elements:  

## The Most Important Elements In A Game  

1. **Jumping** : If a player can't control their player well then the game will be impossible to enjoy despite all else. On the other hand if the game lets you practically do dances on screen with little effort then the controls will make all action in the game more natural. There are many different ways that a character can jump. To cross on one platform to another should be doable enough that it is fair- more than fair. Many games had been ruined by requiring precise jumping. Some jumps are heavy- have a lot of weight to them like in Castlevania. Some don't let you switch directions mid jump- also like in older Castlevania games. Some do, like Mario in Mario Bros. Some just have you soar super high. Then there are weapon uses during jumps to consider. Personally I like how that is done in Ninja Gaiden. Sometimes when you are hit it throws you backward like in Ninja Gaiden and Mega Man. Or at least stops you in your tracks. It is best to match the jumping mechanic with the actual gameplay (the platforming or whatever else.) As for double jumping, it is always a welcome thing in the game and is very anti-unfair.  

2. **Power Ups** : Some weapons in Mega Man have a poor effect. The usual reason is that it is hard to hit a target with that particular weapon. For example, stones that go around in a twirl and if you are to hit your enemy with it you'll need luck. A good weapon gives you control over where you want it to go. Such as one that goes in a north eastern direction, others above, some all around. Some stop time. Some pull all enemies above and away. I personally love the gain-the-enemies-power idea. Like in a metroidvania game, after you defeat so many enemies you gain their power or the ability to summon them. Some games let you charge a weapon before unleashing a greater blow. Some weapons have a special power when you are at full health. Some weapons themselves can lose some power if you are hit, such as in Castlevania when your whip loses length that was gained.  

3. **Capabilities** : Meaning the power you have over the environment such as being able to fly or climb. I never did like the trope of being unable to jump over a fence. Once Mario learned to fly, the whole world marveled. He didn't simply fly, he had to gain speed first. That prevented the gamer from just skipping all of the levels by flying over them at any time. Some nice touches in games have been anti gravity, super jumps, balancing, dashing, sliding, super powering weapons, freezing enemies to create platforms, grappling, and speeding forth, to name a few. If you need any examples or ideas then you don't need to look any further than Zelda and Metroid. Just bringing them to mind gives you a ton of ideas. There are so many ideas out there that one person alone could never think of them all on their own. For that reason it is fair to go through games to see what is possible. For example the relic system in Final Fantasy 6 or the list of abilities garnered in newer RPG games. It is your task to pick, choose, change, and bring them together as well as you can. Some things that are staples among games, have become mainstays. To be able to travel faster in a large 3D world for example.  

4. **Resources** : Meaning things you can get and use in the game. Some games have incredibly useful resources such as The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. You can "harvest" certain things like different gems, food from trees including various fruits, the weapons of enemies, branches from trees, all sorts of things. Some games only let you get certain things if it is day, other things during the night, which does well to contrast day and night instead of them being there without meaning. For most part the more difficult a chest is to find the better its contents.. Though I've gone out of my way before for a chest that contained crap. A very good element in a game is to allow you to make new things from various things collected whether that be new armor or swords, or whatever else. It helps an RPG to get you things far beyond chests and gil. Some have you digging for it. Others have you whacking bushes or burning them. Some are hidden in the deep blue sea. Others in an entirely different world.  

5. **Game music** : Many great composers just pull inspiration from their favorite obscure music. In other words, they slightly rip it off. I had spent all of my youth and young adulthood composing classical music. The most important things I learned were tonality, repetition without minimalism, quality of a melody is significant, and making music that is comprehensible. As for tonality all you need to do is emphasize the notes of the triad in the scale. The first note of the scale, the major or minor third above it depending on if you are in a major or minor scale, and the third above that to the fifth. Those notes in any octave should be emphasized the most with repetition, duration, and frequency. Thanks to some really good notation software anyone can fully write and orchestrate music without an orchestra, knowing then and there how their music sounds. Every era in music had its own distinct style. Such as medieval music. Whenever people hear it they know just what it is. That music had a lot of dorian and organum. Had a lot of fifth tone use. It placed a lot of importance on counterpoint as well. Music like that is good for certain RPG games. It's valuable to know how each era of compositions were made, from Baroque to Romantic music and into the modern era. Some listening to this music can be helpful.  

6. **Game Graphics** : Early paintings were made to just be as realistically done as could be. That was so for a very long time until the advent of modern art which introduced things like abstract and impressionist art. We are in such a time, only for video game graphics. So many new art styles are introduced. Call them "modern pixel art" or "cell shading." Some programmers go for an animated look, others for clay animation such as "The Legend of Zelda: Wind Waker," and "The Legend of Zelda: Link's Awakening," the switch remake, that is. I'm an old duddy. I prefer realism and nothing more. But I can't discount the newer generation. If it works and they like it, that's what matters. 8 bit and 16 bit graphics haven't been thrown out yet. While early days of 3D focused on 3D as much as possible, it wasn't long after that when the old styles were returned to. It's like comparing a cartoon to a movie. People still like cartoons, they don't need them to be realistic either. In fact CGI began to take over animation, never fully able to. It is quite a formula: to mix 2D and 3D. To make the best looking 2D game ever. Or to add subtle 3D touches to it. If you know there is an audience for something then give them a show. Some things are timeless, such as pac man, and we still find people playing games with the simplest of graphics, such as on modern smartphones.  

7. **Game engagement/involvement of a player** : One way to cause it is simply by rewarding the player. As such the player becomes more powerful, more refined. Always have an option B, an option C, etc., "where there's a will there's a way." Or "there's more than one way to skin a cat." Make the game where it isn't hopeless, there's always another way to beat that terribly powerful boss or utterly confusing area. Give the game an interesting depth. Spin an amazing story for them. Don't bore them. Do entertain them.The game should be eased into. The start of the game should not bury the player in texts and objectives. Some games make you think that the programmers really did feel like every last thing should be explained via story dialogue or tutorials. To have multiple endings helps. To offer a different way to do things level by level, to enrich the game with items and secrets, and the depth of a game in general will all aid in making a more involving game. It may be more important to avoid certain things- boredom, taxing the player, having it "an ugly thing to look at," expecting too much from the player, and confusing elements being among them.  

8. **Character and enemy design** : Take a pre existing thing and change it up. It's very simple. Take a frog, give it a crown, take a cactus, give it legs and arms. Take that cactus, make some of them metallic. Some enemies just may be pallet swaps like a red hood instead of a blue. People appreciate Sub Zero and Scorpion just the same. Make the most regal knight you can, or the most cowardly, or the most moronic. Give them awesome looking hair. Take a shield and make it a mirror shield. Take a sword and make it glow red. Make the most monstrous thing you can like an alien or a thing in demonic form. Have a massive enemy that towers high. There are so many different ways that a character jumps. Some raise one of their hands, shooting with the other, some bust up bricks with a fist, others raise their knees when they jump and still others flip- and even flipping jumps differ from game to game. The way the character walks differs from game to game. That is so broad itself ranging from the robotic walk of Robocop to the realistic maneuvers of The Prince of Persia. Some run like Ryu from Ninja Gaiden. Some games naturally need smaller sprites than others, as more of the screen is needed to be seen. A beat em up game however calls for larger sprites. Of course the personality of a character should be developed as well. The developers of Final Fantasy 6 assigned about two characters to different people and then interconnected them afterwards. What a good idea! Some games will require that you build upon their personality and to interconnect everything with the other characters accordingly. Other games require very little explanation or sense, such as pac man. Or even Donkey Kong really, who just wants his bananas back.  

9. **Game Moods** : This matters a lot. It can define a game more than anything else. To list games that illustrate that point: Ghosts and Ghouls, Super Metroid, Final Fantasy 6, Super Mario Bros. 3, Castlevania, Zelda, they have all set a certain mood. For Ghosts and Ghouls it was gothic. For Super Metroid it was an alien hellscape. For Final Fantasy 6 it was a wrecked world that needed to be saved, full of victims that deserved to be fought for. Super Mario 3 was a much happier game. A Link to the Past began in heavy rain and later one wandering through the lost woods with its mystifying music. In that game as well was the ocarina player that disappeared on a trunk of a tree. These are magical moments that the game makers made. They are dark, scary sometimes, strange, and compelling. They can be very brief moments yet have such a strong effect. Like Mario falling from Bowser's airship with a wand in Super Mario Bros. 3. Or the skeletons that meet you with food at a table in 8 Eyes. My favorite example is Mortal Kombat, from the sound of the Gong to the brutal and uncompromising wickedness of it. Make it a wonderful world to behold. Make it feel magical. Set up alien monsters that fill the whole screen. Bring about tense moments. Make relief relief in full. That is perhaps the best thing you can do while making a game.    

10. **Game fun** : The best game makers have it as the utmost thing. "Is the game fun?" If it is then the game has been made right. I will go over that topic later.  

11. **Extra touches/enhancement** : It's like taking a goomba and giving it wings. Extra touches can make a big difference. Some people can tell when things are highly polished. It is a thing some point out in any game, that they feel it has been highly polished. It is present in games that you could see things were placed just right. When a game making team goes through everything and looks for things that could and should be adjusted then it is a polished game. That could be a simple change or a large one. It could mean a more identifiable place or a less confusing corridor overall. Could even be a bit better of a title screen or the expression of a story. They may find that an area is too difficult so they place a needed power up right there. They may determine something would be more fun "if only." Having variety: The way things change in the game from the weather to the trees. The way the rivers and oceans allude to wonder in the distance. Having things shift sometimes. Differing the character's appearance and seeing weapons in hand according to what you have equipped. In Zelda, Link can bump graveyards to bring up ghosts. It could have been left as a kind of meaningless thing but Nintendo created a kind of secret to it. That is if you raise a bunch of other ghosts then kill the first one (which you have to keep an eye on while they all look the same and move around a lot) you will get a ton of rupees.  

12. **Weapons** : In a video game anything and everything can be a weapon, and probably has been at some point. Like a bouncy ball in super mario land. If you are making an RPG these days you probably have a lot to include, from crossbows to everything else. I will not go over what can be a weapon so much, anything can be. It's more important to consider different versions of the same thing. Like a fire whip, longer whip, chain whip, etc. Let the player feel like they really are learning how to fight with various weapons, from a light sword to a heavy axe, a thrusting spear, etc. Arrows are very direct and powerful, but are balanced out with aim. Heavy swords are powerful but prevent you from carrying a shield. Magicians are magically powerful but inept at weapons.  
Before that last boss is defeated the character is granted the best weapon in the game like The Golden Sword. A game maker should first consider what weapons the game has. If an overall theme is come up with first then from there weapons decided on, the more important part of the game will be sacrificed for the theme.  

13. **Depth of game** : More than ever games give you more to do. There are things like side quests, branching stories and branching levels. The game transitions itself from day to night. A great deal more items and weapons are present. There are multiple endings to the game. There is more interactivity in the game between you, other characters, and within the world itself. Maybe the most important thing is that there are no wrong choices. The gamer can play as they like without any real consequences. Some things are harder to accomplish than others but are more rewarding, and doable. Minimalism should be avoided. An abundant amount of game there in as many good ways as possible. At the same time having too many of any given thing will cause the gamer to not know where to turn, or what to use and when. There would be too much to learn, there would be indecisiveness because of it. Worst of all things would lose their meaning and the player will never become familiar with any given thing. That is so in some ways more than others, such as having too many weapons and never the means to get them all or learn any given one well. Other things always do well with constant change such as the environment of the game: warm places, cold places, plains, rain, snow, fair weather, night and day.  

14. **Options** : That is, to not only walk but to ride, to not only ride but sail, to not only sail but to fly. Like job classes and the abilities they bring you. Like having money to buy precisely what you want or need. Maybe more of a focus on big spending in a game. To swim, to climb, to glide, to crawl, to ascend, to descend. Also to be able to upgrade your current items or equipment. To go on a sidequest if you want. To follow different story lines. To do good or to do evil, your choice. To play the same game in 2D or 3D. To fight a wide variety of enemies while you endlessly level up. At increasing levels you can choose among various new abilities to have. Traversing a basic game can either have you on a dinosaur or a skateboard. Some games give you a multitude of animals to ride. Zelda: The Breath of the Wild even let you ride a bear. The benefits have you able to go other places, fly, speed through things quicker, or offer protection. In Golden Axe you can ride a lizard that spits fire. Then, that's the least that Yoshi can do. There may have been only one thing to ride in Mario World but he could do just about anything a multitude of counterparts could do.  
  
If you are making a rudimentary game you may be able to do it all by yourself. You may want to bring together a team. That team should include the best people that you can find. You may like to keep control over the overall design, approving and rejecting ideas for example. It may be difficult to say such things as the composer's music isn't good enough. But for the sake of the game it may be necessary. A decision on what tools you will use must be made. If you are competent at programming code, then all the better. A fun part of the process may be to collect the materials you will need such as pencils, markers, graph paper, perhaps notation software and other various things. A process of study may be to examine old games to collect useful ideas from. Notes should be taken and honed to perfection. You may wish to create a lot of notes, write down ideas, and brainstorm before you begin programming the game. A point A to Z approach may not work very well. And you should make an overall draft then work and improve as you go along. You might implement it into a routine such as working on it 2 hours every day at a certain time.  
Consider this being like an "open source book." With open source games anyone can use the code to improve upon it. Likewise this public domain book is in the public domain so that people can add to it and improve upon it. It is a Game Maker's Bible meant to be made much better and widely shared.  

## The Best Ideas I've Seen Used in Video Games  

They may be ideas already known but it helps a game maker to know as many ideas as they can in order to have a lot to draw from. These help a game maker know their options.    
1. The game turns from night to day. During the night worse enemies are about. During the day more doors are open.  
2. Gathering materials to create something.  
3. Stealing an enemy's power and abilities.  
4. Cash to buy things.  
5. Ability to fly.  
6. A very resourceful world in which to collect things.  
7. Job systems with their abilities such as Mages, Knights, and Thieves.  
8. A map that tells you where to go.  
9. New abilities open up new paths/ routes.  
10. Weaker enemies will run away from you so you don't have to be bothered by them in RPG games.  
11. A platformer with a world map that gradually opens up over time.  
12. Popular metal music in a fighting game.  
13. Ability to upgrade your car in a racing game.  
14. Being able to skip long dialogue.  
15. Weapons in a racing game to make racing more fun.  
16. Riding on animals, dragons, ships, airships, monsters.  
17. Picking up weapons on beat em ups.  
18. Throwing enemies toward the screen in a beat 'em up.  
19. Summoning old gods like Shiva and even Quetzalcoatl.  
20. Incorporating myths in games like the sword in the stone or Icarus.  
21. Guns of a different bullet from honing in on the enemy to a multi shot, or a powerful laser, or a circular shot.  
22. A time limit to beat the level or a countdown to disaster.  
23. Bombs blow up walls.  
24. Powering up your weapon by holding down a button.  
25. Pick up a thing and throw it.  
26. Spying on your enemy in the game.  
27. The game world map opens up like it did in Super Mario World.  
28. Setting the mood from the start. One powerful, like a storm and venture into the castle as was done in A Link to The Past.  
29. Combos in a fighting game like Killer Instinct.  
30. So many different ways to fly from like an airplane taking off to bunny ears that let you glide downward, flying like a thrust upward (oppositely) or simply like a superhero  
31. Terrain changing while you play like in Super Ghouls and Ghosts.  
32. Summons/espers etc also give you the ability to learn things through a separate point system, such as new spells you can only learn by keeping them equipped.  
33. Having easter eggs in the game.  
34. A highly elaborate spell from a super boss such as Sepheroth's "Super Nova."  
35. The map only opens up according to where you have been or by climbing a place high, or accessed in a map room.  
36. Nice parallax scrolling. Nice mode 7. Pre rendered graphics, along with so many other game making tricks.  
37. Sticking to and climbing walls like in Ninja Gaiden. Bouncing off of walls like in Batman NES.  
38. Highly versatile enemies that require a variety of attacks against them. Some enemies bounce around, some have shields and can only be struck from behind. In other words enemy by enemy there are different ways they must be defeated.  
39. Pick just what area or level you want to play first like was done in Super Mario Land 2.  
40. You are a part of a rebel team, complete with fake IDs, disguises, and passwords.  
41. Hitting a thing gives you an item, be it a brick, orb, or lantern- but to do so uniquely.  
42. 100 of an item gets you something- an extra life, a level up in a platformer. Or five of something else gets you something else.  
43. Mortal Kombat where you freeze your enemy solid with Sub Zero or pull forth your enemy with a "get over here!"  
43. The enemy changes into his or her true form, that of a demon.  
44. Being able to do what you want when you want in an adventure open world game such as in Zelda 1 and Breath of the Wild. The more you do the more you are rewarded. If you choose to help the people in the game then they will help you defeat the final boss.  
45. A puzzling way to enter into an area. Or just a simple thing required that just isn't so simply known. For example holding down D will clear a body before you, and reveal a hole to enter. Or circling around a stone before bombing it will only blow up then. Or a pattern through a forest like in The Legend of Zelda's Lost Woods.  

## Obscure But Good Ideas For Video Games  

These are ideas that have been used in video games before. Here I will list ideas that are less commonly known as opposed to more commonly known as in the list above. They may be commonly known but if they are rarely used then they will be included here.  
1. Once in a blue moon all of the old enemies you defeated return, as on the playfield.  
2. Instead of jumping you grapple from ledge to ledge like in Bionic Commando.  
3. The enemy takes your power to use anything metallic.  
4. Being a merchant job class gets you in store discounts or helps you find valuable things out in the rough.  
5. Jumping off of a clif on a hang glider and slowly gliding down.  
6. A mini game that can be pulled up and beaten at any time to gain extra money in an RPG.  
7. Defeat all of the strange looking spiders in the game to gain a great thing.  
8. Freezing your enemy to use them as platforms.  
9. You are a part of an enslaved race or people that escapes and gains the needed power to free your people.  
10. Right before you hit an enemy you press a button and the attack is more powerful.  
11. Fighting against an evil form of your own self. Sometimes to undo your evil side, other times just a shadow of yourself.  
12. Harder platforming at the end of a level, like simple but tricky, gives you the bonus room.  
13. An RPG in a non-traditional setting. Most are medieval fantasy or some kind of future world its own. Few to none are like Earthbound.  
14. A code imputed before a game lets you play an old Atari 2600 game. Something like Ultimate Mortal Kombat 3 did.  
15. If the moment you see something and quickly put in a code then something special will happen.  
16. After meeting criteria in a level a special thing opens up, For example, get all of the coins in a level then something special will happen.  
17. Hitting your enemies projectile sends it back at them. Something like a Jedi or Sith can only do but in a video game.  
18. Book shelves sometimes give you new recipes from which to create things. All you need are the ingredients after that.  
19. Being able to steal an enemy's magic by drawing it out.  
20. Exploring the sea in a submarine.  
21. Undead enemies are easily beaten with curative items or the life spell.  
22. A certain enemy in an obscure place can suck you into an underworld.  
23. You have a choice: take a summoner's stone or have that stone placed into a sword.  
24. Gain lock picking skills.  
25. Avoid dead bodies, they have The Plague.  
26. A shadow of yourself that helps you fight.  
27. A mix of a god game simulation and a side scroller like was done in Act Raiser.  
28. A personality test determines your race, if you want it. For example "Dark Elf" or "Warrior."  
29. The enemy sends you back in time.  
30. The main enemy is a freak of science made more powerful by it, and now is against his creators.  
31. A hover board to ride on.  
32. Taking the sword of your fallen father to avenge him. Like Ryu Hyabusa did.  
33. At the end of a beat 'em up two player game you have the choice to go against the second player, as the last boss tells you if you defeat your brother and join him you'll be greatly rewarded.  
34. The game challenges you with what seems suicidal yet pays off greatly. Such as by being at the edge of a clif you are asked "jump down?" Or you have just 10 seconds left before everything blows up and the game asks "wait a little longer?" Like in Final Fantasy 6 where you don't leave Shadow behind.  
35. The people made powerful machines to fend off an evil returning to the world, only when he returned he magically turned those machines against them.  
36. Street Fighter 2 like button presses to perform an attack in an RPG. For example the code pressing of A then B then down towards right causes a special attack.  
37. A tag-team element in a platformer/ side scrolling game. At any time you can pick the other to play as.  
38. A dark world in contrast to the regular world and traveling in between. That is surprisingly uncommon.  
39. Any time a statue comes to life. There could be many of them in the game then suddenly one of them comes to life. What you thought was just a helpful thing is suddenly attacking you.  
40. An upward scrolling game if done right, such as Kid Icarus.  
41. If you pick a certain name for your character then something special will happen. Like choosing the name Link in The Legend of Zelda will send you straight to the second quest.  
42. The enemy wins but the batter continues... in the world of ruin.  
43. An RPG with dozens of playable party members.  
44. Going 2D from 3D to slide through narrow things.  
45. Riding through the ocean in a submarine.  

## Special Section: The Basis for a Whole New Game in Many Possible Forms  

This is a section for those who want to make a new game. A lot of ideas are here, so many that numerous different games can be made from them. It is a broad series of ideas to use in making any number of different games and don't be afraid to go off the beaten path.  
The difference between this section and the others is that this one will only include all new ideas. The rest of the book mostly contains previously used ideas.    
Remember: as a public domain book you may use it however you want to.  

* **Ideas For Video Games (New) :**  
These ideas may have been present in video games before. There are a lot of games out there! But as far as I know they haven't been used before.  
  1. Take the fireball idea obtained from the flower only if you get a mushroom after that it'll make the fireball larger. A "mushroom for the fireball."  
  2. Finding the scattered pieces of an idol to restore the great church.  
  3. Different color coins buy different things each and the ability to control what color you harvest.  
  4. White, black, and gray magic have their own MP bar. HP has its own bars based on what way you are attacked, and the ability to raise which HP set you want to.  
  5. An HP bar based on how many gold coins you have, if you want to use it. For example 1,000 coins equals as much HP (GHP- Gold HP.)  
  6. You can only skip certain battles by bribing your enemy. Such as "give them the (  )" and if they accept it then they will let you flee.  
  7. The music shifts according to how you play the game, what characters you have, etc., causing new themes.  
  8. Slight music changes indicate things. The music suggests what is going on around you or that certain things are close.  
  9. There are buttons assigned to colors. Such as L being green and R being red. By pressing them those colors around you in the game are affected someway.  
  10. There is a line up of enemies "weak to" either fire, wind, or ice, and certain abilities bring out the combination you need to beat them one by one.  
  11. In an RPG stormy weather makes for better lightning attacks, even free lightning attacks.  
  12. Protection lanterns to make a safe path with.  
  13. Buying instruments for the game music. Such as buying a harp will add that sound.  
  14. An enemy in the game makes the most annoying sounds, defeating it removes that sound. Also- if you defeat all of those enemies you'll know you have beaten the stage.  
  15. Collecting idols to create a doorway, each leading to its own special place.  
  16. Getting a by-percentage discount for giving the shopkeeper certain things. For example a special branch will get you a 20% discount.  
  17. Creating exactly what potion you want. By mixing a multitude of ingredients together in the right proportion has an exact effect. Less focus on swords and armors, more on alchemy.  
  18. Less equipment equals more experience points per victory.  
  19. Alphabetic letters of an unknown language are obtained one by one until you can fully understand what some say. Or those letters equate to a magical language of new spells.  
  20. Two great temples to tackle in order to gain two wings. Once you've gotten both wings you can fly, like an angel.  
  21. Once you pray to an idol of a god you have its powers to summon it.  
  22. Bank system in the game is more complex than just putting money in. You have the choice to save a percentage of your gains (like per battle in an RPG),you can borrow money that automatically goes back to them when you get more. You can study and make investments.  
  23. Shops let you auto buy. When you've gained enough money it is purchased without having to return to the shop.  
  24. You can post a camera to spot a rare creature to capture or fight. When the camera sees it you are alerted. Or having cameras to post that let you see any area whenever you want to.  
  25. There are puzzle bricks to hit. When you hit them a puzzle comes overhead to play and beat, if you win you get something nice. Could be tic tac toe, a number guessing game, black jack, or whatever else.  
  26. A side scrolling game where the game is played in a vehicle. Instead of person based power ups, vehicular ones (different shooting, different speed, larger tires, flying abilities, etc., There are things like speed boosts on the ground. The car can grapple onto things and stick to walls.  
  27.The second player character gets entirely different power ups. The game is much different just by playing a different character, has different enemies and all kinds of different things.  
  28. There are three or so different dimensions constantly shifting in the game, automatically. So every ten minutes you enter into a different dimension.  
  29. Game has invincible stairs. Just by pressing up right at the base you climb up them.  
  30. The greener the grass is, the better items it will have by chopping it down.  
  31. Old dead trees are easier to cut down. Trees age quickly in the game.  
  32. Glasses as a kind of item to find or buy. They each let you see things you otherwise wouldn't, from enemy stats to treasure, things invisible or the right path you should take.  
  33. The quicker you act the higher your spirit goes and the more power you obtain.  
  34. An area where everything transforms as a character becomes a super power. When the player reaches that place all of their inventory and appearances change into a more powerful form. Some of the items they carried may have been useless before entering while a sword becomes a magical one and they don an honored robe.  
  35. An option to buy an auto use potion. Those purchased are auto used during battle when HP gets low.  
  36. Buying a subscription that comes once an in-game month which teaches new spells, offers traveling advice, reveals in-game secrets. Just like Mario gets coins to continue a game (credits) the magazine is like within the game itself offering maps and things via subscription or issue purchase.  
  37. Having a spirit sword. They may be  the most powerful among swords. The more energy or spirit you have yourself the more powerful the sword. A sword that can fly and spin around.  
  38. For summons you can obtain idols that increase their power. Such as if you can summon Shiva, getting a Shiva Idol increases her power.  
  39. You can combine two jobs into one after you've learned both. Like "red mage" but a mix of all the other jobs too. Could be any two combinations: monk and knight, or knight and thief, etc., they each create an all new job as you choose to mix any two.  
  40. You can fuse any two characters together. Like a fusion earring in Dragon Ball Z only in an RPG.  
  41. Getting the same power up increases its power. Or getting a set of different power up combines them. There are power up enhancements as well, that add a kind of effect to any owned powerups.  
  42. A switch that turns helpful lights on- a light switch for multiple lights each telling you where things are, specifically, instead of guessing.  
  43. Button pressing mechanics like holding down the attack button and twirling the thumb stick makes a spinning sword attack. Holding down the attack button and pressing up on the D pad raises your weapon above you so that it can fly around, or doing that either releases your spirit or makes you larger. While holding a button and pressing down shrinks you.  
  44. Magical keychains determine what doors or locks they can unlock.  
  45. Magical keychains determine what's beyond a door. 20 different keychains 20 different rooms with just one door. This idea has a lot of other uses too such as one water different potions per magic bottle. The magic bottle determines what the water will become. Kind of similarly placing a fire gem on a sword adds firepower to it, or wind power with a wind gem.  
  46. Staircases gradually build during the game quest by quest. "Honoring the gods" makes a new staircase build, step by step until you can enter the heavenly realm. Whatever realm it leads to or the way the new step appears depends on you. There can even be a number of different staircases to build. Also it can be by leveling up and along the way there are rooms to enter into while going further and further up.  
  47. Finding a way to make second quests better. To have it be more than just a character swap with minimal differences. To change one thing among it all makes a great overall difference. It could be you are given a bundle of older games upon completion or living free in the world afterwards doing nothing but playing games. Or the purpose never ends, there are always things left to do in the game after you have restored its peace.  
  48. A never ending game. Games that are never completed like a racing or casino game can be placed into an RPG in order to give the player something to do far beyond its quest. It retains value of play after everything else has been done. No longer helping the King but instead playing golf.  
  49. The music is auto generated this way: there are a set of melodies, chords, percussion, etc that are randomly played yet all fit together well. So say there are ten sets of 3 measure melodies, those are randomly played while the other music is being randomly played.  
  50. A large message that you find the letters for. If it has a few A's, some other vowels, whatever else then the objective is to complete the message. Or whatever word you complete you get. Such as fire spell or whatever, while other words are far more complicated.  
  51. Scratchers and lotto in the game- the player can get a lotto ticket in an RPG and possibly win an enormous amount of money. Not with astronomical odds but perhaps 1 in 2000.  
  52. You can get dice in the game as found hidden or earned and every roll gives you better and better items. They can be used as points to buy things. Or instead of numbers on them there are power ups on them.  
  53. Choosing who will get the experience points and who won't instead of having to kill them off to do the same. Or proportioning out experience points as you want to.  
  54. An educational open world game. It teaches anything you could want to learn just by wandering around a simulated earth- from bird watching to parking lots, they contain real world things to educate you about them.  
  55. "College Professor," a game of a simulated school where you can learn about any number of subjects, be graded and things like that as found in real schools.  
  56. Tasked with bringing the prince, the son of a King, back to life.  
  57. Monsters drop things after their defeat that you can combine into a monster pet or something. Different combinations can be made. One the horn of a certain enemy, another the tail, etc. Like a frankenstein of monsters.  
  58. A Soul Necklace to grab from an idol in order to become it. They are hard to reach and find but when you do you can become that being at any time.  
  59: Ways to improve the old Pac Man idea: gold/ different color pellets scare ghosts longer. Basic things like an item that freezes ghosts in place. More than just four ghosts. Jump item for Pac Man.  
  60. You are the only one on a planet that is an alien whose race was blocked technologically from coming there, and you must open that gate.  
  61. You can design the look of things such as a weapon or decide on different designs of the same thing. For example "sword style 2."  
  62. As a funny effect some enemies make your weapon too large and heavy to use. You might have to cast a shrink spell on it!  
  63. Choose the level power of local enemies for gaining more experience per battle. Selecting higher difficulty results in more experience.  
  64. Randomly call on an enemy from a "foriegn land" to come fight you, They are enemies from different parts of the world you haven't ventured into yet. Or a little differently, using a special stone that brings up enemies that are otherwise unplayable in the game.  
  65. You set the power of your abilities this way: you are given nine rows and numbers 1-9. You assign a number to 9 different things. All nine numbers are used and only once, so 9 is assigned to what you want to be the most powerful, and 1 the weakest.  
  66. There is a tunnel that most often goes nowhere but if you see that same tunnel with a light coming out and go through it, you enter into an awesome place.  
  67. The more bad you do the blacker your wings become. The more good, the more white, This eventually allows you to enter into either heaven or hell. If you are balanced you may become gray, and more powerful on earth without access to either heaven or hell.  
  68. Certain fish have swallowed treasure which is revealed when you try to cook them.  
  69. Throwing and breaking a pot that has slime monsters inside. They may help you, too. Or pottery has acid inside that dissolves a door or a weak wooden floor.  
  70. A highly powerful item that sucks up everything around it for your use. It may take all the fruit from the trees, all the coins of an area, or clear all forms of monsters around you. It can clear a small pond for you and things like that.  
  71. In graves there are souls that may reenter into life by receiving payment from the gods. They can't pay the price themselves but you can. So going up to the tombstone they may say ""pay me two diamonds and I may return to life and help you." Insert here what you want the help to be. They may join your team of fighters for a while, show you where a great treasure is, or give you something they had during their lifetime.  
  72. Cutting a tree with a special sword or axe imparts power/magic into it. You can collect spell branches that way, giving you spells you couldn't have otherwise. They may require the right tree, one white for white magic, one for black magic. Or if cut during high winds, a wind spell, if in the snow, an ice spell.  
  73. Upon leveling up or some other way you get points that can be used to change the environment. It may open up new areas, add a moon above, grow new trees, add more of a kind of thing, birds or treasure, or even to change the in-game music to some extent. You have a list of options to spend points with which you earn,  
  74. Some games let you spend energy on a more powerful attack. This game will let you spend energy on other things like super jumps, flying, swimming longer, and your energy bar gets higher over time.  
  75. Like Mega Man weapons use seperate energy bars however the weapons in this game uses your regular energy bar and the more powerful the weapon the more life energy it will cost you.  
  76. When your enemy dies, there is their grave. A tombstone appears telling you what they need to return to life with, such as Holy Water. Bring them back to life and they are at your service.  
  77. The great day of refinement occurs in a sacred area during a total eclipse. For a fee you can buy an area to place your things then when that day comes all of the items you placed there will be greatly improved. .  
  78. The game offers real world sage advice from great philosophers/ Buddha and such figures.  
  78. Perhaps controversially you play the game as Christian, Muslim, Budhist, or other major religions (or go renegade in making your own) with the objective to make your religion the one globaly followed. Different difficulty- from 50 % followed to 100%. Think "The SimCIty of Religion."  
  79. A job that has race classes and job classes- the race class brings difference to the job class (e.g., an elf can be a scout or an archer.)  
  80. Learn a race instead of a job. The race brings with them their kinds of jobs. Play as the race you wish to become.  
  81. A certain block turns the level dark revealing different things.  
  82. The special effect of one side scrolling level is that you run much faster in it. Maybe an enemy character dosed you with speed powder at the start making you move too fast. It happens if you hit a block with a sideways arrow on it pointing forward. As a result a character runs faster which can be either good or bad.  
  83. Speed running options before you start the game. Such as no damage allowed for zero damage runs. Setting a time limit to win the whole game based on the newest world record. Level select that lets you practice. Comparative videos of levels. Options for certain kinds of gameplay too not necessarily for speed runs but things like no powerup playthroughs for online videos taking that challenge.  
  84. You get a gardening shovel in the game. With it you can dig up valuable plants or plant new things. Also, there is a special flower that asks you to plant it in the sun with the other plants and if you do then it gives you some of its seeds so you can make many more of it. They create something good for you or have a good effect on something.  
  85. Like in a lot of games you can get fruit as energy boosters and things but the ones in this game ripen and mature into better things. Maybe you can tell by its color, going from green to red. Fully ripened is more powerful and sometimes the fruit starts to grow useful things on them.  
  86. The beat 'em up is based on Earth, Air, Wind, and Fire. Fire characters have fire powers, air has wind powers, etc. Each has a color, like Earth is brown. Each makes fighting equal with the other. Each is more powerful than one but weaker than the other. In two player games this brings some strategy.  
  87. There are three different kinds of coins to collect. One a gold coin, another crystal, and the other like a gem. The gold one lets you buy things. The crystal one gives you an extra life- at 100, and the gem gives you 5 gold coins or 20 crystal coins, randomly.  
  88. SimCity Online- with which a whole world of cities are made, each sharing resources and helping the others. Added to that might be the civilians of SimCity.  
  89. In an RPG you can monstrify creatures, spirits, and beasts, for different reasons. You may during a random battle to have a better opponent in helping with leveling up, or to use them as summons in other battles. So things like a turtle can become a dragon.  
  90. The player can select between different elements to level up (Earth, Wind, Fire, and Air elements) each gaining power over them. With Fire spells you are better. With Earth potions you are more benefited, Air stuff pertaining to the spirit and life, etc.  
  91. Throughout the game you can send things to the upcoming Dark World and once there you will be more benefited.  
  92. Looking for all four chapters of a book teaching spells. If you find all four chapters per spell then it's yours.  
  93. Effects like gaining four arms, a centaur body, angel wings, you can really customize your player beyond humanoid form.  
  94. By helping others you get an honor gem. After helping any five people a spirit comes to you and says "I have seen you help 5 people, I will give you an honor gem." And the more of them you have, the more giving others are towards you, because they see them and know what they are.  
  95. The special whip pulls your enemy toward you whom you then become.  
  96. In a game you have a power to fall through things- just about anything from a two story home (getting below quicker instead of annoying stairs) or into a buried tomb. Could be 7 Layers of Hell which the player can gradually go further and further down into.  
  97. A very multipath side scroller, one customizable. There are six doors at the end of every level. One may be for a more-coin level, another that is "easiest." One "different" one "simular." And one "All" if you want the game set up where you play all levels.  
  98. You get one wish among three after a game over. A wish to continue, to have enemies reduced, or to have power ups increase.  
  99. A comic book brought to life. A comic book game in the style of "Comix Zone" except you can play as any Marvel or DC comic that you like.  
  100. If you beat the game you win an earlier version of it.  
  101. The enemy boss that came closest to defeating you must be beaten again near the end of the game.  

* **Character Ideas :**  
  1. Instead of a bard, a scot with a bagpipe.  
  2. You have a large goat with wings to ride on.  
  3. The character is a sword wielding warrior that turns into a fighting skeleton if hit, but continues until hit again.  
  4. In a beat 'em up only the strong character can lift up and toss people/ heavy things. Only the magician could use a magic staff. Only the warrior can effectively use a sword.  
  5. Mixing fantasy race types (half dwarf half elf, half goblin half elf.)  
  6. A once evil goblin made good because of handling the sacred stone, which he was trying to steal.  
  7. A wizard trying to find his way home. Along the way he finds a few others trying to do the same. They can only return home after banishing the evil in the world they were sent to.  
  8. An alien character that knows far more than the more primitive human race and proves to be very helpful. He can make potions and better weapons.  
  9. A half dragon half devil. A half dragon half angel. A dragon that takes human form.  
  10. A gray mage. A mage that can read magical alphabets and learn new spells through magic scrolls while other mage types cannot.  
  11. Rival gangs fighting each other. In a beat 'em up game, or in an RPG a gangster job class. They have control over certain parts of the city. Entering them can be a lot of help but going into areas they don't control can be dangerous.  
  12. A bard that can learn magic melodies from birds in the magic forest and so reach the end of the forest. Only the bard can speak to the birds to find the way through.  
  13. You were defeated by a prime enemy but your life was preserved by placing your brain into an android body. You now have far greater power.  
  14. You search for a wizard of great power to learn an essential spell. He turns into a dark spirit after you do, drag you into hell, and tells you if you can get through his dungeon then you can have the spell.  
  15. Four human-like goats in the sky standing on clouds. You are able to meet them after icarus shoes are obtained. You have a sacred gift for them. In return you can choose between four super powerful items: like a magic sword, shield, ring, or spell.  
  16. A character's brother is at long last found in a shop selling items. His brother agrees to join your quest and along with him his inventory and a large sum of money.  
  17. Idols are common in the game. Only a couple of them come to life. You pass by one and its eyes come to life and look at you. It forms into a being that joins your party. That could be a regular character then or a summon.  
  18. You are trying to get someplace across the sea and a pirate helps you in exchange for his freedom. He was locked up in prison, you are the prince, and you need his help. You also free three others. One a monster hunter that will fight against a great monster of the sea, another two your soldiers. That'll make up a part of your party in the game.  
  19. The Sun God returns to earth, the moon god too, its friend, and the god of the sea. They were held back by an evil and well calculated spell but now peace and the stability of the world can return.  
  20. A son of the sun, a daughter of the moon, a daughter of the sea, and a sun of the earth were born onto the earth to save it. The one of the sun is a warrior, the one of the moon is a magician, the one of the sea a summoner, and the one of the earth an alchemist.  

* **The Possible Setting/Story :**  
Here are some ideas for the possible setting/story of your game.  
  1. It was a dark and stormy night...  
  2. You, a prisoner in a small prison world, have escaped.  
  3. Your friends of the resistance have broken through the defences to free you, a person of royalty, and now you are on the run more than ever.  
  4. The King has at last awoken from his long slumber.  
  5. The human race is imprisoned. You and your cellmates have stolen a shapeshifting potion that makes you appear like the race that imprisoned you. Taking it at just the right time you are able to escape and now seek to free the human race.  
  6. Instead of the crystals in the game being good (like the old idea that the crystals are fading and the world with it) the crystals are evil and must be destroyed.  
  7. You are a treasure hunter that comes across a strange stone...  
  8. You seek to resurrect a former King slain by the new King.  
  9. An evil magician cursed you with an evil eye between your eyebrows. You must find the magic needle to pierce it. In the meantime people are disgusted at you, even hunting you down.  
  10. A plane crashes down into a bermuda triangle kind of thing and the survivors find themselves in a new dimension, trying to get home.  
  11. You search for the four ingredients that will make the potion that saves your loved one.  
  12. The sacred dragons are being hunted down for their medicinally powerful blood. Or maybe their blood is gold-like. They guard the world though- when they are gone so is their protection.  
  13. A fisher caught a golden fish that spoke to him, telling him to find you and bring you to him. He then tells him his quest and says "Cut me open," they aren't sure if they should. " And kill you?" they ask. "I'll live on." It says. So they cut the fish open and find a magic ring inside him.  
  14. The furthest reaches of the game map, the four farthest corners of it, have orbs to collect and bring into the very center of the map. Afterward the lower or higher realm is opened up.  
  15. It is unknown where the kingdom's soldiers were buried by an opposing force, but once that is known a magic horn can be blown there to raise them from the dead.  
  16. A magic tree asks for a special potion to make its roots go far. After watering the tree with the potion its roots connect to some stumps far away, which grow into trees again producing very helpful fruit.  
  17. A futuristic town that guards its secrets. You are on a mission to smuggle out a powerful item for your king.  
  18. In an RPG a ring/accessory that is called "gift from the god" that gives you surprise gifts from time to time.  
  19. A powerup that: makes you an ape, you can climb vines/trees, makes you a goat, can climb tall things, makes you a cat, you can dash around, a bird, you can fly, a bear, you are powerful, a rodent, go into smaller areas, fox, can find hidden areas or things, or a horse that can run fast and strong.  
  20. An evil sorcerer has created a frankenstein of kings. Of kings all of whom were evil, that became an evil bane to the world.  
  21. The king is experimenting with dragon eggs. He is trying to make them more powerful and have them serve as his guards. However, that backfires and an abominable creature is made that threatens the whole world.  
  22. The powers of heaven and hell divided the world into two parts. You are a Gray One however and the future of the world.  
  23. You were taken from your parents to become the King's son, long ago, but your parents never forgot about you and seek to get you back.  
  24. A god made you into his son and proposed you to be The Chosen One.  
  25. You are the good chosen one fighting against the evil one. After you defeat him you merge into The Gray One.  
  
* **Possible Power Ups and Items :**  
  1. Book of monsters you can fight also citing rewards for defeating them.  
  2. A wishing lamp obtained during the level will let you make a wish before the next level. One of three wishes can be made. Different lamps, different genies, perhaps.  
  3. A fireball attack turns into an ice attack by holding down L.  
  4. Freezing the whole screen with an ice power with a charge technique.  
  5. Plus square/brick increases any power to a power up you currently have. Divide square/ brick makes two of yourself doubling all you do.  
  6. Along with coins, pogs. Pogs are disks with neat images on them. In the game you could get them from villagers, in a temple perhaps, which could be used to summon. Better than that in a side scrolling game hidden in a brick. Once gotten could be used to summon a thing to ride on or defend you.  
  7. A magic fair where magicians show off their stuff and you can learn new spells and potions there.  
  8. Waterfalls are where you get Holy water. Sewer water has poison. Salty water protects. Cold water heals. Hot water from springs cure ailments. You can have a certain amount of bottles to collect it.  
  9. Higher bricks to smash require the Kung Fu power up. By having it you can do a high uppercut jump. Like in a side scrolling game it gives you special flips and harder more effective kicking of things. While a ninja suit powerup gives you the ability to climb walls.  
  10. Some enemies drop crystal bones after defeating them which is especially useful. They make magical strong weapons or shields. As well, a crystal shield can be the most powerful in the game.  
  11. Shields that auto cast reflect as in an RPG. Shields that get more powerful until they burst and become useless. Shields have a fire, air, earth, or water symbol on them, defend you against those accordingly. A slime shield that absorbs power directed at it. An air shield randomly shoots forth a powerful gust. When an elemental shield is charged with magic directed at it absorbs it and sends it back. A water shield may look like a fluid shield. The earth shield is just made of metal. A mirror shield can mimic the enemies attacks. On the back of a shield may be a harp-like set of strings, adding musical powers to it such as a bard character could use. That could be defence based giving the bard both musical attack powers and defensive magic.  
  12. Instead of a star the power up from a brick looks like a ring and upon touching it a gyroscope goes around you that makes you invincible.  
  13. If you pass up a star powerup it comes to life and thwirl around the stage protecting you.  
  14. Instead of coins to collect you collect fairies. There are four color fairies you can get during the level. Each does their own thing. A golden fairy is currency in the game or maybe towards getting an extra life- by getting five or so.  
  15. Coin spending blocks. Like the Mario Bros multi coin block except the more you hit it the more coins are spent towards something. So hitting it five times puts five coins in it, ten times for something better, etc.  
  16. A yellow star as an invisibility item, a red star lasts longer, a rare blue star lets you remain invincible for two whole levels.  
  17. Feather boots let you walk across any pit. They also send you upwards if you have them on when you jump onto a whirlwind. They let you double jump. If you hold down a button you can float down.  
  18. Coins are always turning and you can get either a heads or tails from any coin. 100 heads gives you two extra lives. 100 tails give you one new life.  
  19. At the end of a level a square with three images rotates, like in Super Mario Bros 3, only a special item in the level lets you slow down the rotation to get what you exactly want.  
  20. You can gamble in the game for powerful swords and things but the better the thing the harder it is to win it.  

* **Tools/Effects :**  
  1. Can be any real world thing given magic powers in the game.  
  2. Special pans- to cook with, to uncover gold with.  
  3. With thorn vines you need climbing gloves.  
  4. A horn that raises things from the dead and who knows where those dead things are resting or what they would do if you called them up.  
  5. There are generators in the game you can collect power from. You have a power bank to draw energy from them when you go to them. Such as a wind generator, where you can get an especially good amount of power on a windy day.  
  6. Batteries in the game of lesser or greater quality. They charge the things you use from vehicles to ray guns. You can use more traditional weapons but battery based ones are more powerful.  
  7. With a time freezing weapon you can steal things and you can observe things better.  
  8. Certain wood creates certain smoke when burned, each color bringing about a certain thing.  
  9. A ray gun so powerful it can make a large hole in a wall.  
  10. A vehicle with a powerful burst of energy moving away large monsters or people in front of it.  
  11. A protection ring lets you go through more dangerous but shorter routes. An offering at a grave site in the area may protect you too.  
  12. Wearing a certain thing makes ghosts surround and protect you.  
  13. A mask lets you go through hell unharmed.  
  14. Butterflies that drop valuable dust into a pit which can be collected. Only so much can be generated and collected at a time.  
  15. There are images/paintings in the game you can bring to life. Sometimes you can time travel with them or go into different dimensions. A dwarf image will bring you into the lost land of dwarves. A treasure chest image will bring a treasure chest right before you if you bring the painting into life.  
  16. Weapons that attack while you jump over an enemy. Like in Link's Adventure Link attacks downwardly with his sword whenever he jumps over an enemy. However, with a whip instead.  
  17. A shadow of yourself that goes on all parts of the screen fighting for you. That lasts about ten seconds per powerup.  
  18. Dead raise powerup lets you continue fighting as a spirit after you die. First there is no powerup, you may die with one hit, then there is an armored one and if that fails you are just left with your spirit, if you've gotten the new life powerup.  
  19. Attacking any enemy in a temple will cause a very dangerous evil spirit to appear.  
  20. The gambler gets a slot machine for the enemies s/he defeats. Those call upon them like a summon when s/he gets three in a row. Or the gambler can turn certain other things into a row on a slot machine.  
  21. A mushroom of changing colors, a sword of changing colors, a star of changing colors, are each more powerful than their counterparts. Plus it's just a cool effect.  
  22. A weapon where you can draw a wall or ceiling. Flip it over and you can erase a wall or floor that is blocking your way. Twirl the thumbstick and you can create a circle to shoot at your enemies.  
  23. The locals tell of a story about a witch once living nearby. There is an abandoned home nearby that has a witch's pot that can do magical things. It can do all sorts of things: infuse magic into weapons, make helpful potions, etc. There is also an idol there with an offering plate below it. By placing a coin on the plate the god comes back to life- can be a summon, an enemy, rewarding, or punishing.  
  24. Magic trees have magic branches for magic arrows or magic wands. Ancient arrowheads once blessed with magic may be found as well.  
  25. A metal detector in a game. Many valuable things may be found from coins to relics, magic rings, and chalices, etc.  

* **Weapons and Similar Things :**  
  1. Staff that shoots a throwing star.  
  2. Shuriken of different poisons.  
  3. Ghostly hand, a hand on the screen called on to lift heavy things or grab something out of reach. Give it a magic ring to make it capable of more.  
  4. A staff with a razor sharp disk on the tip. It can cut through things, the disk can leave the staff and fly around.  
  5. A disassemble item option within a shop. After you disassemble you have materials you can use for other things.  
  6. Dynamite on a staff instead of a candle, set it, find cover, and boom! It could be there as a trick too, but at least the second time around they will know what to do.  
  7. A ray gun has a slow regular shot, if powered up by holding down the shoot button it has a faster but less powerful shot.  
  8. Holding down the charge button makes the shot reach farther.  
  9. Loud musical symbols that scare the enemy away.  
  10. Like in a beat 'em up you can pick up anything as a weapon but in an RPG. So during a random battle anything laying around on a field can be picked up and used.  
  11. A conductor's wand makes enemies dance and fly off the screen.  
  12. A pitchfork as the main weapon in the game. By charging it (by holding down the attack button) it gets red hot at the end and shoots fire. The second weapon is a mace. By charging it the mace becomes ice cold and can freeze things. The third are throwing stars. By charging those they spin around like a whirlwind. The third is a hammer. Charge it to make the ground quake.  
  13. The main weapon is a crystal ball with crystal spikes on a staff. There are multi color orbs in the game. Strike them to get their power. They correspond to blue for water, which produces a water attack, clear for wind, which makes a whirlwind, red for a fire attack, etc.  
  14. A halo protects you. Horns let you bonk into things.  
  15. A ring that goes through an enemy cocoons them and absorbs their essence.  
  16. A bomb that you have telepathic powers to direct, having it fly to the exact place you want to blow up.  
  17. Charging your gun makes it hone in on the target instead of making it more powerful. Different guns have different charge abilities. Some produce a more powerful shot as is typical, others hone in, a laser gun charge can go through many enemies. The laser gun charge takes longer than the others.  
  18. If you get 15 coins in a Kart racing game you will get a random powerup. Or every 10 coins you get will give you a burst of speed.  
  19. Once you buy a sword/ weapon it can be replicated at half the price, in order to more cheaply provide them to other characters.  
  20. A pacman-like thing comes out and eats anything ahead of it.  
  21. You have control over a bird. You can make it dive, create a great gust, pick you up and fly, find things, look ahead and all around, and more.  
  22. A shield that sends attacks back to the attacker. Or if you can quickly enough use it, you have the power to send any thrown weapon back at your enemy.  
  23. You have a power of force that goes from weak to strong in making enemies unable to attack you. At the furthest reach of that you can even stop bullets.  
  24. Every character in a beat 'em up has a spirit animal. One a lion, one an eagle, one a bear, one a bull. You can call on them under certain conditions. Maybe when you are very low on energy, or have increased a certain meter.  
  25. A laser gun shoots out a beam with a circle at the end. That circle increases by one charge button, by another button turns into a turning saw, by another forms into a spike like triangle, and by another will blow up.  

* **Powers and Magic :**  
  1. Poison level two makes poison more likely to work against enemies (which commonly it doesn't.) Might be called "Poison 2" or "Toxin." And other spells like Toad 2 make it's casting more likely successful..  
  2. "Give" spell. Makes the enemies give you things like those in a random battle.  
  3. " Treasurize " spell, turn your enemy into a treasure.  
  4. "Use to Defend" command that lets you choose a spell to defend yourself with. So select it, select "fire" then you are defended with fire, which is best against enemies attacking with ice.  
  5. A free cast option for magic based on level. Once at a high level lower spells become free.  
  6. Magic Point Stones can be used instead of MP. Your choice.  
  7. Mega Magic Stones increase the spells of their element- such as a fire stone making all fire spells more powerful, until your stones run out. You can tell if that is active by a glowing of the word "fire."  
  8. Mages in the game can only use weapons like swords based on magic- a spell controls its execution.  
  9. Instead of a run to fly meter a run to catch fire meter, so at the end of the meter you become on fire and kill enemies just by touching them. If in an ice world you become cold instead.  
  10. A spell in an RPG doubles yourself.  
  11. A power jump lets you burst through walls.  
  12. Spells can be charged for a more powerful effect.  
  13. Riding on a scorpion with a laser beam stinger.  
  14. The more any given thing is a color indicates its weakness and strengths.  
  15. Any given spell does more than attack your enemies. Lighting can bring things down. Fire can burn things down and cook and create a campfire. Poison can be turned into a remedy. A particularly powerful wind spell can divide an ocean.  
  16. In a side scroller you face the enemy again, like in Mega Man, however the second time you defeat each of them you get an upgrade to the weapon they gave you before. Like the second Pharaoh Man gives you a larger ball of energy, bright man makes the screen pause longer.  
  17. There is a staff with a crystal ball during some random battles, perhaps just in some areas. Whatever magic you cast on it will store it up and release its power at your will.  
  18. By being a shapeshifter you can get into places you otherwise can't, you can become different beasts and things, you can go deep into the sea by turning into a fish, you can become a thing that bursts through walls, or you can become a horse to travel faster. If you learn the power of the flying horse, then there is that to use too.  
  19. A spell that turns enemies into 2D. Just as an amusing gimmick.  
  20. There are four magic slides to find in the game. With a magic camera you can take pictures to fill up to four slides. Cast on the wall you go through the image of the same thing but in another dimension. For example you go to the sea but it has been drained of all water. You see a strange door someplace and that turns into a doorless place. You are in a dungeon unable to get something you want but by taking a picture there you return to find it is now accessible.  
  21. The heaviest gear is more powerful. A broad sword takes up both hands though. By learning a spell it makes them lighter.  
  22. There is a set amount of auto spells. You use them once and their effects never stop.  
  23. You can cast a permanent spell on a temporary one to make their effects last a whole battle.  
  24. Casting fire or ice on the warrior player infuses their weapon with it. It is a spell you can call "infuse." Infuse can also be cast on potions or rocks. Rocks are useless otherwise. If you know the spell you can make them into powerful throwing items.  
  25. Professional magicians in the game can take just about anything you present them and make it into something entirely different.  
  
* **Abilities :**  
  1. Instinct lets you auto dodge attacks or prevents the players from making mistakes. The higher it is the more likely a player is to automatically dodge what would have been a landed attack. Instinct can also reveal hidden areas or items. It can give you ideas of how you should act and proceed.  
  2. Calling out four different fairies. One reaches things you can't get to. One finds secrets. One translates things. The other defends you.  
  3. In a fighting game a fighter can make harmful evil spirits fly around the gaming area.  
  4. In a fighting game you can pound onto the ground and if you do so enough a hole is made into the bottom floor.  
  5. Schools paid for to learn things like blacksmithing or foriegn language understanding. Buy your own supplies as required such as a hammer.  
  6. A coin capture ability. Turn a monster into a coin. That coin is more valuable than regular ones.  
  7. You can enter into soul mode. You can leave your body to wander around.  
  8. After your physical body is defeated in a fighting game your soul has to be.  
  9. You can possess things, only you are half and and half yourself still. So possessing a brick gives it arms and legs. Possessing a turtle makes you half turtle half man. After that you can possess yet another thing, adding parts of itself to you.  
  10. You can sell your level in an RPG for gold or a nice item. The higher your current level the better the thing you get. Your level then goes down by one.  
  11. Cups are in the game. A powerup lets you raise them and tip them upside down. When you do something will pour out.  
  12. One magic power is to drop a ton of boulders, they can fill up a dangerous pit or fall above a long spiked area, allowing you to tread over it.  
  13. You can raise a fallen party member without any potion or MP cost. However they are undead in that state and you have to go out of your way to a priest to fully bring them back to life. As undead they sometimes ignore commands. So the player tells an undead one to cast a spell and sometimes they do, sometimes not.  
  14. In a beat 'em up a magician can open areas the other characters cannot.  
  15. A bard can learn any music in the game being played. So on the overworld when the music plays he can learn the actual game song and transport back to that area when he plays it. If there is a jukebox in a room of a village he can learn that too and transport there.  
  16. A dash move in a fighting game makes your punch stronger. A charged punch or kick too by holding down its button then releasing it. Charging up two or more attack buttons produces combos. That may be seen on the top of the screen as "combo ready."  
  19. One item equipped makes you run faster, another makes you invincible when you do.  
  20. Every time you get a level up you get a level up coin that can be used to pick a prize in a level up prize store.  

* **Other Things :**  
  1. A hidden rainbow in a brick/square bridges you to a secret magical door.  
  2. Music block with a twist. Like a set of four playing different sounds and if you play the right motif then something special happens. Above the screen appears a face and hands playing a flute then the character gets powered up. The combination can be shown on the block by lighting up for you. Like the first block lights up then the third, etc. four of those showing you how.  
  3. You can buy pets at a pet store. Such as a falcon that lets you see things from further above, a dog that locates things for you, an animal to ride/ fly with, or an animal to protect you.  
  4. There are four warp points, three are definite, the other is random. The random one may either take you to a farther level or back to level one.  
  5. An invisible platform that doesn't go all the way across. You have to leap right into the middle of a gap then jump again onto the other side.  
  6. Invisible platforms that raise you up.  
  7. Pits or holes of three different colors. They indicate what is below by jumping into them. A colorless pit or hole acts like a regular one, jumping into it will just harm you.  
  8. A lower team and a higher team fighting each other. The lower team can only get its items from below and the upper team from above but they can fight each other anywhere.  
  9. The levels have a through hidden door area that contain a large touch tone dial (numbers one to nine). You learn codes through the game. Some of them are randomly shown as one-time codes. Codes have different effects like calling on help or obtaining a powerup.  
  10. Instead of things coming down and killing you they squash you into a smaller person, then you can go into smaller places.  
  11. During any level you can get a color. Each paint in a part of a picture, of your choice. Every complete picture gives you a special item.  
  12. A racing game where the first lap makes a track. The cars can fly and make their own road, set by the first lap. Or an item in the racing game gives them five seconds to make a different track. That could be helpful for going over obstacles or minor shortcuts.    
  13. Contains a star that bounces out and goes somewhere. If you follow it you will be led to a special thing you couldn't get otherwise.  
  14. Cryptic treasure maps full of esoteric hints to where a treasure is.  
  15. Birds laying golden or silver eggs especially if you lay around magic bird seed.  
  16. You can restrict stats to get more experience points. You can set them back to normal when you want to. If you restrict your stats the battles are more difficult but you will gain more experience points.  
  17. You have two options in a Street Fighter 2 like fighting game. One, you can have a longer energy bar but have certain power abilities restricted, or all abilities active but a lower energy bar.  
  18. You can get one of four shapes. A square, triangle. Rhombus, or rectangle. They appear on the top of the screen inside a box. During the level you see on the ground that one of those would fit. So by pressing a button you release it downward into that gap and something special happens if you do.  
  19. All of a sudden the stairways to upper realms appear. In many areas invisible staircases became visible and accessible. Or you can have the blue ones, green ones, red ones, and black ones appear by getting certain items or doing certain things.  
  20. Differently, the pits to lower realms come about which you can climb down into.  

* **Nice Touches :**  
  1. Instead of breaking bricks, shattering crystal squares/cubes.  
  2. A fastly spinning circle throwing out coins. You hit a brick, a circle goes above it, spins fast and coins come out. It makes getting coins feel like a nice surprise.  
  3. Ghosts come out of more slightly looking crystal bricks. A rainbow colored brick makes a rainbow bridging you to a secret door. The ghost one might make you into a ghost and let you go through things after you make contact with it.  
  4. In a fighting game the walls are closing in. If they crush both areas both lose the game.  
  5. A quick sand area in a fighting game. If you make contact with it you are more vulnerable. There is a special technique for every player to get out of it, such as a strong uppercut.  
  6. Money system in a fighting game. Buy abilities and things. Maybe based on how much time was left on the time limit after you win.  
  7. An enemy can throw your soul out of your body.  
  8. A waterfall is where you get potions for your bottles. There may be red, blue, and green waterfalls according to the potion you want.  
  9. Instead of torches lighting the way, Jack 'O Lanterns do.  
  10. Upside down pipes have globs of different colors falling out of them. They form into things based on whatever their color is. Some are easy to defeat but others indicate danger.  
  11. A tiredness level per character or enemy. The heavy swords and shields are more powerful but increase tiredness level quicker. The enemy's tiredness level makes them vulnerable to a sleep spell or during long fights. A pause of defense lowers your tired level, so does an item like coffee.  
  12. The great sword is in a tomb in the middle of a forest before a wall of fire that many have perished by trying to enter into, but when you do you just walk right through.  
  13. If you are going to use an inn often like you often do in an RPG then you should be able to rent the place for a month, at a higher price but a discount overall. And to rest you only have to enter the room.  
  14. Make your own level by choosing a combination of things. It could be possible with a certain item. You choose among a number of things you want the level to be like, to have it changed and created accordingly.  
  15. Shooting a certain enemy causes a pillar of energy to come up. That is jumped on top of to be brought to an upper level.  
  16. There is a special item in the game that makes all gold/coins more valuable.  
  17. There is a stretching rope across a pit. Jumping on it will spring you up. If you put a heavy thing on it the string will break allowing you to descend into that pit.  
  18. You have a beast to ride on in any given level. There are two exits in the level, one makes you lose the beast, the other more difficult exit lets you keep it.  
  19. There is a "weird world." If you strike a gong in a hidden area the whole level becomes weird, like out of shape enemies and power ups that don't quite work right.  
  20. When your time starts to run out a bell comes on screen and rings.  
  21. You can spit an enemy into two and when you do they fight each other.  
  22. In an RPG you can give your summon new weapons. They can get larger and more powerful based on certain things. You can combine any two for an all new summon, like one mixed.  
  23. Same game, different decades. For example playing in 60's mode, 70's, 80's, 90's, up until the modern era and who knows, maybe the future vision of those decades (like what the 60's thought the future would be.)  
  24. At a game-over you must ventre through the land of the unliving. If you look around well enough you may find something of use in helping you when you return to the living world. But you have a limited time there. There are other helpful things for you in the land of the unliving: advice, and appearing into a different part of the world. If you have certain items it will let you stay longer in the land of the unliving. The right weapon will protect you there as well.  
  25. The only game over in the game is getting arrested. You are immortal though. Bribing the guards with money may help. You may be sentenced to a bit of community service. You might have to fetch an item for the King. The idea here though is that a game over comes not from being slain but by other means.  

* **Possible Enemies :**  
  1. Stars that fall from above and lunge into the ground.  
  2. A jack in the box instead of a plant in a pipe. The head suddenly comes out bobbing around to hit you.  
  3. Little green army men come out to attack you.  
  4. The evil of mankind created a beast of all beasts, part man, part pig, part bear.  
  5. The last opponent in a fighting game is a brain in a mech suit.  
  6. An evil Goat King with a friend snake.  
  7. Pig with bat wings and a spear.  
  8. Many arms and many blades. Looks like a plant enemy from a Mario game but has two blades wielded by its vines.  
  9. You can maneuver an enemy into sludge or something- you can push them.  
  10. A certain amount of enemies can be woken up from their possession, you only get a few chances but if you do then a particularly hard part of the game will be made easier.  
  11. A skeleton enemy which is common but they have different skeleton pets to help them against you- like skeleton dogs and cats.  
  12. The main bosses are based on the zodiac from cancer (crab like) to scorpio: the scorpion. They can be come across in an astrological way. Or the Chinese Zodiac to use instead.  
  13. Like Kraig but there's a ghost in the robot body instead of a brain.  
  14. Enemies throw mushrooms at you and if they hit you the screen gets all screwy and crazy.  
  15. Birds that have long blades like beaks swooping down on you.  
  16. Bats that will gang up on you if disturbed.  
  17. Four animal spirits to defeat: The Bear, The Lion, The Gorilla, and The Bull. Gaia produced them because of the evil that humans did to the world.  
  18. The main enemy is set up in a Super Metroid fashion but isn't Mother Brain, it's a triangle with an eye in the center. That is just an evil and powerful presence, a great source of evil.  
  19. Coming upon a main enemy that is playing an organ when you first meet him. His music is eerie and you've heard it before, everytime you've come across a major enemy boss. Then you must fight all of those enemy bosses in a row. He is a shapeshifter that was all of those bosses.  
  20. An evil being that burst down the doors that locked away darkness, bringing demons into the world, which he consumed into himself to become an ultimate power.    
  21. Zombies/the undead coming out of cocoons.  
  22. A flying... scorpion, snake, boars, bears.  
  23. Every enemy you defeat gives you a card. At any time you can shuffle those cards and play against them again. You can get other cards too. One that is valuable is a double experience card, when pulled you will get double experience in a row of battles. There is a double money card too. After defeating a row of enemies you will get twice as much money as you would have. It all makes leveling up just more and more fun.  
  24. After defeating a major enemy their shadow comes to life. Only the magic lamp can defeat it one last time. It is a steak tip lamp that pierces into it and defeats it for good.  
  25. A wall comes to life, opens its mouth, and inhales you into a more dangerous area.  

## Good Ideas for Games  

1. A map that tells you just where you should go.  
2. The more friends you make during the game (or like the more people you help) the more help you'll get at the end of the game.  
3. It sets just the mood you want it to.  
4. Control is smooth and intuitive.  
5. Graphics are good to look at.  
6. The music and sounds are excellent.  
7. It is a great escape to play it.  
8. It keeps you wanting more.  
9. It gives you what other games do not.  
10. The game mixes things up well (like the same ideas within it, only done differently) for example one level has giant enemies instead of small enemies.  
11. Having weapons that are varied and fun to use.  
12. Having variety  
13. Personalization. Having what you want, being what you want.  
14. A challenging game maybe but beatable. No brick walls stop you from winning.  
15. Good things to focus on in the game, It grabs your attention.  
16. Learning precision. This is usually so with a game with repeating patterns like Ninja Gaiden. Maybe a hard game but a predictable one over time. Then before you know it you are slashing your sword in just the right places.  
17. Having an overall theme. Creating a whole new world as has been done with the Mushroom Kingdom or DisneyLand.  
18. It is easy to pick up and play. The player doesn't have to come to too great an understanding in order to do well.  
19. For some games: it is amusing. It takes real world things like a ball and chain and makes it into an enemy.  
20. Using as many different colors as possible in the game, just because you can do so.  
21. Creating a story remembered for a lifetime.  
22. Humor in the game is truly funny.  
23. If graphics and all else is limited then you'll need the ability to take simple things and make them fun- like the best Atari 2600 games did.  
24. Having a variety of ways to do the same thing.  
25. Different ways to play: such as 2D or 3D, having a timed solo race in a racing game, or a two player battle mode, along with regular racing.  
26. Not being afraid to go away from the typical definition of a game. Like making a Casino game that has non casino elements. Just making a game in that case which is more defined as a money-making game.  
27. Making some levels special. Having them contain things that other levels do not, such as a frog suit to swim in.  
28. Giving medals to the player to let them know what they've accomplished and what they have done so far in the game. I saw that in Dragon Quest 11 recently. Such as after defeating a certain amount of enemies, forging a certain amount of items, and gaining a certain amount of money, the game awarded me with a medal and gave me an idea of what I have done so far.  
29. Simplification and greater simplification. Taking a thing that is just too complex and simplifying it while retaining its substance.  
30. Adding that extra touch that makes an ordinary or plain thing much better.  
31. Even though a game is difficult it is predictable as it is pattern based like in Ninja Gaiden or you fare better after learning their weaknesses.  
32. Having solutions to any given problem. Making a bad thing good. Giving the player a second option. For example Breath of the Wild had swords that would quickly break except for one: The Master Sword. As such came as a great prize for any gamer that would obtain it.  
33. Passwords when the game is simple enough anyways to keep them short. Why not? No limited life flash or battery saves.  
34. Lots of things to buy.  
35. A bonus room with nice stuff to win.  

## Bad Ideas for Games  

1. Your weapons break.  
2. Too many of the same enemies, and those such as only being a pallet swap.  
3. Highly unrealistic difficulty levels you can do nothing about.  
4. Confusing corridors.  
5. Bulbous heads in character design.  
6. A convoluted amount of items.  
7. Overly drawn out stories/ narration/ explanations.  
8. The music doesn't fit the mood.  
9. Easily getting lost.  
10. Too many different buttons needed to control the overall game.  
11. If you don't regularly eat food you will die.  
12. Things unfair: such as being thrown off the screen when you are hit, requiring expertise in dodging attacks, unrealistic expectations.  
13. Platforms that are very difficult to jump past without dying.  
14. Things that create compulsions that deter from the basic game.  
15. The game doesn't feel like you are accomplishing anything.  
16. An out of the way treasure chest that's worth nothing.  
17. Far too many random battles.  
18. Not enough different enemies, many are just pallet swaps.  
19. Systems that are too difficult to learn.  
20. Glitchy behavior in the game.  
21. Not only strange, but very weird.  
22. Too much to do at any given time.  
23. Pointless gameplay.  
24. Hits don't make the target, it has to be too precise.  
25. Graphics of awful 3D.  
26. Based on a simple thing like a board game but is too simple itself.  
27. There's no substance to it. It wasn't worked on enough. Only a few levels, none of which are good.  
28. It tries to be too many things at once.  
29. It requires you to remember too much.  
30. There's no depth to it, it is too simple.  
31. You have no idea what to do next or what to do after that.  
32. Collect-a-thons. That is, all you do is collect things in a game without anything more to it. Too many "fetch quests."  
33. If it is just too complicated then it shouldn't be included.  
34. Trying to be just too realistic. Being too real-world just reduces the magic of an imaginary world.  
35. Making a licensed game that has nothing to do with what it's based on.  

## The Success or Failure of a Game  

When a game making company doesn't know what they are doing but does it anyway they are faced with a bunch of hot garbage. They just seem to say "we aren't going to lose any  money over this, sell it anyway!" But when the best game makers started off they surely loved what they were doing. They may have not expected much out of their creation. They may not even have cared much about the money and the company so much as what they were working on. Which for them wasn't work, just a fun creative process. And from these either great or awful games are made.  
Anything that is revolutionary has to be the first time it is done well. If it misses the mark even by a little then it will just be passed on. Sometimes the reason is more external like with the original Mega Man game, some say the box art alone inhibited its success. Mega Man 2 was flushed out just well enough to make it among the most classic of games. Street Fighter 1 needed just a little better of a touch. Street Fighter 2 went all out as Capcom dedicated themselves to making it as good as it could be. The first one just didn't quite have the graphics and things it needed to be as successful as the second game was. Mortal Kombat didn't copy Street Fighter 2 other than the most basic of things. They weren't trying to copy Street Fighter 2. Street Fighter 2 just set off their lightbulb to do the same thing, only more in the style of Bloodsport. I believe that movie had more influence on them than Street Fighter 2 did. They ran with an idea that brought together all of the things they loved and wanted in the game, in either case. In many cases that is how good games are made.  
Zelda was not just a straightforward game. A straightforward game isn't so entertaining. Rather Zelda had you looking around and you didn't know what would come next or how, you just knew you had to keep looking. As a result there was a lot of mystery to the game. The mind would wonder where Ganon was and if you were close to finding him. Imagine the first time a gamer got the bow and arrow or the boomerang and what a nice difference that was to the sword. They've seen these things on the title screen and something like the magic sword was especially sought after.  
Castlevania and Ninja Gaiden were of the same design while Metroid got thrown into the pot. I feel like we need a Ninja Gaiden metroidvania game. Jump to 3D may not be such a high jump compared to how Castlevania turned into such an excellent new game by making them more like Metroid. Sometimes innovations don't work. There is a lesson to be learned by Zelda 2 and games that just steer totally off course. That lesson is: don't try to be so smart, just give the people what they want. Cell shading Zelda or turning our course into Luigi's mansion is not a place we wanted to be! However- it's inevitable that an idea will run its course. What was awesome and new at first no longer is. It just becomes more of the same. Sequels will be made. They can even bump up the whole idea a lot farther. After that it goes downhill. Things become too old and familiar. Everything that can be done in the game is nothing new. The game becomes convoluted and after that final last perfection nothing new can be added to it.  
Hardware plays a large part on what genres will either succeed or fade away. Hardware itself makes new genres of games. When things went from one screen to side scrolling, a platformer was the most natural next step. 3D hardware created 3D games, which was very inviting when it came to shooters. Right now games are being given more and more open worlds. Some games just didn't fit after 3D. For a while everything was being geared for 3D. Game makers learned though that the old ways of game making are still desirable such as random battle RPG games and platformers. They've returned with a new coat of paint. They are learning how to best combine 2D and 3D. Some games even let you pick between the few. That is not at all that uncommon. The art of game making is being added to every day.  
Good video games were a cascade of wonderful imagination. Good games place you in the mushroom kingdom or Hyrule. Bad games leave you with the feeling of "more of the same," a thing without its own "neat substance." That substance will both create abilities for you and also set limitations in a neat set of rules and environments. Places that the gamer is taken to should be good ones, with repetition considered and dealt with. The impression matters a lot. Taking a look at Zelda games- Hyrule was a neat place. It followed a style. It was distinguishable as its own world. The people in it didn't act like humans do. It is at once being cast into a world that you quickly learned and desired to explore.  
During a console launch getting enough appealing games out there can have them rushed. Yet they make no mention of bug ridden or lackluster games. Rather they serve you gourmet crap. Opinions will always differ in different ways. The way that a player doesn't like a genre to begin with, the games a child would play are different than what an adult would enjoy, sometimes a game just doesn't fit right for certain players while the majority of people really like them. There are so many games being released these days that involvement in any game is just temporary. One thing then another and really it keeps them from standing out for a very long period. Opinions change over time too. Some games do not age well. Others do. Some seem to have been passed by at the time but later quite popular like Bach you could say or cult classics. It all goes with the point that there is no perfect game. There are games that individuals may find perfect but there are no universally perfect games. Back then when a Pac Man machine was in any given place it would have had very little time without someone in front of it. Now? I'm sure a whole week could go by without one person playing it. Back then it was more true that the good were among the few. You can compare that to films. Who's to say what is timeless until much time has passed? If you put Gone With The Wind back in theaters would it fare very well or just be a mockery?  
A good game making company is all things to all people. They cover a number of genres. They may even invent new genres if they feel that fits into the concepts of their games. Capcom, among the greatest of them have made Street Fighter 2, Ducktales, Mega Man, and even worked on two Zelda games. If you know Nintendo, that takes a lot of trust!    
No doubt some success of a game depends on its marketing. Anything heavily advertised the right way will do much better. Word of mouth will propel it even further. What's able to be more popular will make the game succeed more too. That means it creates a fan base. Mortal Kombat had a fanbase based on controversy. It was a two player thing that helped that along. The arcade machine was very attractive, which also helped.  
Maybe the most important thing is this: that the game maker makes a good product. Trustworthy game making companies just won't release a bad game. They may have worked on it a year or more but if they found it was just not going to do well according to testing then they won't release it. Such companies become reliable. Gamers know that whatever that company produces will be good. They don't even have to see much more than the company logo on it. Others cheat their way in. They lie and profess it as the greatest thing as of yet and whatever they lack are made up for with deceptive advertising and licensing of certain brands. We all know though what we get with a Tiger handheld or JVN. In the gaming world the JVN logo means "keep out" What you make may not be the greatest game ever or even the greatest game of the year, but then again, it might be, and it least it isn't among the slew of terrible games out there, if you are committed enough to make a really good game.  
  
## Contrasting old Ideas  

This is all considering how things can be done differently.  
For example: Mario doesn't go down a pipe, he goes down a (?) They range from very obvious (instead of a fireball, an ice ball) which rip off artists are more likely to use. To less obvious: such as instead of going down a pipe going down a well. Whatever keeps it from just seeming like the same thing is good, if it is good to begin with. Imagine a bear that follows you when you are not looking, then when you look at it it turns into a stuffed animal. Add care bears to that, make the little bears be in the upper clouds. All you have to do is go through old ideas and use them differently. Just avoid overly simplistic changes, such as having an explanation block instead of a question block, with no other differences between you and Mario Bros. That game was creative enough that a ball and chain became an enemy. Ball and chains have nothing more to do in the real world than for immobilization of prisoners. Video games don't have to make any sense. I think they require less sense than cartoons do. You could go off of this basis "Castlevania + (Your favorite show or book) =" Combine any two things at a time, combine those with others, as a process of coming up with new ideas.  
Then there is inspiration that comes from movies. Whole games have been made based off of certain movies yet never even outright say so. For example, Contra was based on the Alien franchise. There are many more things to pull inspiration from, of course. Be they books or myths, like Kid Icarus. Legends of old demons or evil spirits, past magic, along with art that the game maker alters to serve the game better. Maybe a good first step is to write down your inspirations. To not make too large a list but to make one you know well. To include your favorite heroes, villains, shows, movies, cartoons, etc., to have a list of inspiration to pull from.  
A genie in a bottle? How about a fairy in a bottle? Jack and the beanstalk? How about Mario and the beanstalk? Mario got bigger with a mushroom. The Altered Beast got more muscular with an orb. The ghost is afraid of Pac Man. The ghost is afraid of Mario.  
It is a previous thing done better- it adds things the others were lacking. It fits in missing pieces. It gives what the other game could not. Sometimes a game cannot be better as is. All pac man clones were just lesser games. Unless a great deal of thought is put into what could be better and how, many game makers will not come onto a very revolutionary thing. RPG games started out as simple as could be. Hardware limitations were partially at fault. That wasn't so for very long however, and 16 bit machines could pull off a great deal of content. These games had to transition between Dungeons and Dragons to the video games they are today. It isn't a board game but a video game. You can compare it to a movie from a book. They just aren't the same. It has happened throughout the history of games- games going from a pre-existing medium into the realm of games.  

## Game Making Tactics  

* **Mixing things up well** : that is, take pre-existing ideas you have and change them throughout the game. Say you have an enemy, make it larger later or give it wings. Say you have a sword, alter that later, giving it more power. One has fire power, another ice, each looking a little different. The idea is "now there is a (  )" while making the player feel that a cool element has been added to it. A silver treasure chest has less than a gold one. One a wand of ice, another of fire. Things don't always have to make sence in a game. The best games do not. It's better to focus on the wonder world of a game and work on the place of your character and what he does. Whatever there is in real life can be made into weapons, characters, enemies, power ups, etc. Even haunted houses into ghost houses.  

* **Go where the good ideas run** : If an idea just gives and gives of itself and is easy to work with that way, then you've found a good thing. If they don't seem to go anywhere, don't get stuck on them. If you've just found it impossible to make a bad thing a good thing, then leave it behind. If any one idea produces many others, then work on those ideas. More mediocre games just walk. Some are altogether uninteresting. A good idea just pours itself out. A good idea is a song that writes itself. That often happens when you are willing and open to work with an idea. Sometimes you may feel like it's all just a tedious thing but those moments when you are proud and engaged are the times when you find yourself truly enjoying the game making process. The most important thing is to just make a good product. If it is maybe a good product but not a great one, continue until you feel it is the best it can be.  

* **Keep notes** : That is where the work begins. It is the first thing to do. To create the basic story, ideas, and characters. To draw, to add and to have a good start on what you want before you actually begin programming the game. Some game making companies have a box in which programers put their ideas inside. Keep drawing. Have what you need to do so- pencils, pens, rulers, markers. Come back to them later when your mind has been refreshed. Place all of your ideas in a box. Don't throw anything away. If you are stuck on something, return to it later. Take time everyday to decide just exactly you want the game to have. Save your notes because you may need them in the future games you create.  

* **Bring together a good team** : Establish what you are in it for. Know well how much they can benefit the whole project, or how little. Don't feel you have to hire anyone who isn't as good as you want them to be. Some of the best companies have been easy on others and have come together as friends. Such as Google! If you all love what you do then you accomplish greater things. In a manner of speaking a band can have top selling music but the band itself just falls apart and separates. That often happens because they just can't see eye to eye. Be open minded with what your teammates come up with. Hire the right people to begin with. Base that on their experience. You might consider writing out a contract. Good programmers left Atari simply because they weren't being given any credit. They formed Activision from that. Then there is the possibility that you don't even need a team or maybe just one person such as a musician. If you are especially stuck on something you may just need a person to fix it and continue by yourself from there. Momentary help should be considered if you really need it. If you really like what they do then maybe you can convince them to continue with you.  

* **Have a good eye** : Don't fool yourself into thinking that a bad idea is a good one. It is a common mistake. A good idea isn't necessarily a good one, either. The programmer may feel like they've touched upon something special but isn't doing much more than impressing themselves, while others may not think so much of it. In other words you aren't a person so much of your own good ideas as much as a person making good things for others. Look for the thing that stands out. Look for the things that cause stronger reactions. Game makers don't see the world the same as those in so many other professions do. Some things are far simpler- making a good melody, good lyrics, an abstract style of painting, etc. Being a game maker however calls for much more imagination. Being good at art and drawing helps. Knowing how to write good music. Producing a good story. Many things from other things are put into a game. It's always good to be looking. Time spent watching playthroughs of games is time well spent for a game maker. All forms of gaming videos are. To watch top tens, reviews and those sorts of things can provide you with rich ideas. At the same time always ask yourself how you would do the same thing only differently.  

* **Be in it for yourself** : People ripping off Pac Man aren't. They just want a quick buck. So they halfway do a game, perhaps based on a movie to garner greater appeal. Think more like the Mortal Kombat team did. They didn't just want a new Street Fighter 2. They had inspiration from themselves. They wanted that but more brutal and mature. The most important thing is that you make a game because you want to. And to contribute in a new way, you must do things your own way. Sometimes you will present previously used ideas and that's okay to a certain extent. As long as you are having fun and wish to contribute something new and excellent then you will do well. Being in it only for yourself though can also be a problem. Like a band suddenly deciding to do it their own way. Their audience doesn't like the change. Why would they? It is like they are suddenly listening to a different band. A capitalist only gets rich by providing people with what they want. In effect they serve the people. A competitive spirit goes a long way. It requires a lot of constant thought and work if it is to outdo the competition.  

* **Be a part of the times and the community** : You will know what people want. Take what is new and popular and put forth a game that people in modern times would love to play. People in one time do not want the things of the past and in gaming aren't really looking toward the future. In the early 90s fighting games were all the rage. Those were what people wanted then. There was a time before it where people were looking for a good space game. RPGs were popular for a time. Anything 3D was for a while. And FPS games had their day- one that continues until now. A good question to answer is "what is good for modern hardware?" The best example of that was when 3D first became popular. As well when certain things weren't possible, or if done at all done poorly, is not yet a thing whose time has come. Those games that took full advantage of the hardware like racing games often do, were the most impressive if nothing else.  

* **Bringing a game into modern times** : Nintendo asked Zelda, "how do I bring bombs into your new 3D game?" And the answer was to make the game go down the floor and up a wall. The best thing about new games is that they can be robust. While old 16-bit game makers had to be very conservative with what they included to save space, modern games don't nearly suffer from the same problem. As a result there can be more of everything- including choices, items, paths, places to go, whatever the game maker wants to have included in the game. Fully orchestrated music was a first. Some games just slipped in actual video of things. I had so long wondered why Final Fantasy 8 looked lifelike to this day until I discovered that. With new things in gaming comes new ways that things are done. It helps to know how things are being translated and evolved in order to keep with modern times and even stay ahead of the curb.  

* **Knowing what game makers have done before, but doing it better (such as from Double Dragon to Streets of Rage, or a racing game unto Mario Kart.)** : Looking into "what better games could have been." Such as old forgotten games that had no evolution to begin with. The best game makers apply inspiration the best way asking themselves "how could this be better?" In the process they truly evolve things. There are so many examples. It happens all the time, up to a point. Naturally sooner or later ideas are exhausted. New things or old things could still be, only they become much harder to find over time. Yet there are games that come and go that never evolved. There are many games that are one of a kind to this day. There are those that may have gotten just one new rendition, such as Marble Madness to Monkey Ball. If that initial game wasn't considered then Monkey Ball may have never been.  
Once inspiration catches you find the same thing being done again and again. As there have been many kart games since Mario Kart. Before Mario Kart racing games were generally the same. This new style caught like fire. Sooner or later it loses its appeal. Nintendo are masters at changing a genre, Super Smash Bros being another example. If you asked me how much different a fighting game could be like with Street Fighter, Mortal Kombat, and all of its variations, I would have come up blank. I would have said "not much could be added to it." But Smash Bros. proved that wrong.  
There are many things just waiting for a similar evolution. Many of them were just brushed past never given another thought. Some may have not evolved in ages. People don't so often make new kinds of pac man games. I haven't seen a Dig Dug kind of game in God knows how long. The ideas for these games remain great. A lot of people still play Pac Man. But I don't think the idea for Space Invaders has been used since Millipede. It wandered off into so many space shoot em up games like R Type.  
Many would say "I wish this game would go back to its original form," but few game makers act on that. For example it took until Breath of the Wild for Zelda to be a true exploration game again (rather than having to do things in a predetermined order, you can basically do what you want when you want.) Where were the game makers that wanted a return to form? So there are great game making ideas based on that. Mario Bros 2 USA hasn't been like that since that.  
Find your style. That's what the best game makers do- they have a style, a way of doing things as they want to as opposed to what others have done. We all have a set of interests. They are very broad. So a good thing to do is to learn exactly what you like and bring it together. We typically like a large number of things. Within things we may sometimes wonder how we would have used the same idea. Ideas aren't copyrighted. It is their expression that is. George Lucas wanted knights in his movie, as those within a religious order, perhaps highly relatable to The Templar. So through lightsabers and the power of the force he was able to carry those ideas into space.  
  
* **Have your game be rated by others, or get input in various ways.** Ask for opinions. Have elements of the game rated on a scale from one to ten, such as graphics or story. Ask them how things could be done better. If they have good suggestions then use them. As such, be more of a team even when any one person is working on a certain thing by her or himself. Having a second opinion goes a long way. It gives you a greater perspective. It may be missing just one thing. That one thing could make all the difference.  

* **Be your own developer, if not with just a small team.** Others have your side already, technically. They've made it easier for you with game making software and printing out boxes for you online. Tutorials are available online, so as to be able to do precisely what you want. Whatever you want to learn about you can do, whether you are learning python or how to make a game on a really old computer. The older systems required less coding. If you just don't have the desire to make a game you can do like I did and just make a book of ideas. Choose what system you want to program for. Pretty much anything out there from the Atari through early Nintendo consoles to something newer. Some of them have great game making software associated with them. Others are multi-platform. Be smart and don't get too far ahead of yourself. It's harder than it seems. It is made much less difficult with patience, however. You could just do a draft and go from there. Notation software can be used to create music in many cases. In fact notation software is often used to create whole scores in movies. As for games, most always. Just don't assume you will know all you need to know from the start, but it is good to have a general idea to start with. Maybe your first game is just practice. Instead of setting out to make the best of all things it is better to build up practice for what you are doing, anyways, and as such no time is wasted. And of course "anything worth doing is worth doing right."  

* **Know what resources are available and learn to use them.** 3D printers can make shells for cartridge games. Those themselves can be designed just as you want them to be. Online places can print out boxes and manuals for you. Stickers can be mass produced for you or you can make them on a printer. Disks with the right files can be mass produced for you. If you don't need so many, those can be done at home. Disks can also have labels printed on them. Certain software can make video games much easier than learning how to program. If you do want to learn how to program then there are tons of videos online that will teach you. Games can be tested on emulators. You can advertise your game in a number of ways, and free in many cases like with video sharing sites. If you have a large and worthy project you are working on then you may be funded with a kickstarter. As for finding a team to work with, look online. Treat it like you are starting a band or something. Get people that at least equal your talent. Use social sites, post messages requesting help, elaborate on what you are trying to accomplish, mention the reward of getting the product done, to bring in help. As for making the game music, some game making software contains it. Not all consoles are powerful enough for long music files as produced by a notation software but some do. Some have you working with midi files. Some of the older ones are just four or so tracks.  

* **Know your limitations and work with them.** Some projects are just too ambitious for more modest systems. Sometimes you are deep into something when you have to turn around and make a ton of corrections. Sometimes you get stuck on a thing you are not too well educated towards. If there is a problem that is just causing too much difficulty then there are a few ways to deal with that. First, you could find a different way to do the same thing. Second, you can take it as a learning process and become smarter from it. Third, you can abandon it. Fourth, you ask for help from someone else. If something just can't be made better but doesnt need to be focused on anyway, then just set that aside. Try not to over focus on something that seems it could be good but continually fails to achieve the result you want. Focus on the larger and better parts of the game rather than the smaller and insignificant things/ improvements/ minor details.  
  
* **Going back to old things** : Some ideas never had the chance to go very far but all ideas can be improved upon. There are many good one of a kind games. There are games that were just good at the time but never had a chance to evolve. The game maker can also evolve bad games into something good. Game making companies evolve their own ideas to better games. The first wasn't liked, the second was, well enough to go long into a series of new games. They took their idea and made it better.  
  
* **A list of one-of-a-kind games** : I am not listing any Nintendo made games here simply because there are too many of them and most are well known already. However I'd like to mention these: *The Legend of Zelda Four Swords Adventure*, *Earthbound*, *The NES Kid Icarus*, *Pilotwing*, and *StarTropics*. If they've been copied a lot or had a lot of sequels then they won't be listed here as the point is in their obscurity. They may not literally be one of a kind, but here is a list of those at least close to that: *Marble Madness*, *Blaster Master*, *Bionic Commando*, *Chrono Trigger*, *The Immortal*, *Act Raiser*, *QBert*, *Dig Dug*, *Paper Boy*, *NiGHTS into Dreams*, *Crystalis*, *Star Wars Chess*, *Dragon's Lair*, *Betrayal At Krondor*, *Myst*, *Organ Trail*, *8 Eyes*, *Rygar*, *Faxanadu*, *Yar's Revenge*, *A Boy And His Blob*, *Cavemen Games*, *Hatris*, *Wizards and Warriors*, *Joust*, *Legacy of the Wizard*, *Monster in my Pocket*, *Rampart*, *Spy Hunter*, *Uncharted Waters*,  *Flashback*, *The Lost Vikings*, *MechWarrior*, *Out of This World*,  and *Body Harvest*.  
  
* **Enjoying it all :** It's meant to be fun, not tedious. It isn't meant to be a sit down to code and logically determine. It's meant to have fun on graph paper with a pencil and evolving ideas in order to make a good product. The other end of that leads to a great game, which leads to pride. If all that is wanted is a quick buck, then what's made will not be memorable or even worth playing. Those that do that may as well be con artists. Be patient one and all. Start with a draft that isn't absolute. Look into- quarry, what would make the game be the best it can be. Get the blood flowing. At the start one doesn't know what to even make of a thing. The start is always more difficult, not the later work. Things will start to come together and when it does it will all become much more fun. To get there halfway is to be so far along. It is like going from unsure to sure. Just don't be a painter that says "this will never look good" and rips up canvas after canvas. It always helps to know that once it is all done it is done forever. After that it is just a matter of computer files and easily gotten packaging. To advertise maybe or whatever easy thing is left the hard work is done. You have a finished thing. There was a ton of time spent in making certain games. It sometimes took years. But now they are all complete. They've been complete for forty years but continue to be sold to this day!  

## Having the Most Fun in a Game  

1. **Money spending elements** are one of the best parts of any given game. Spending money on things like: weapons, powerups, armor, items, game helpers, make-easier items, precious items, extra lives, energy potions, enhancements like clothes, car parts, new areas, new transportation, things to seed and come back to later, hired help, new spells, easier routes, to enhance/upgrade your inventory, to upgrade your power, for new abilities, and on keys. As for getting money that comes in many ways. Some of those may be: slashing grass (in an adventure game or RPG), random battles (and that one monster in the game that drops the most), selling things in an RPG (old weapons or things you collect), gotten by gambling, found in a hidden or hard to reach area, awarded you as by your job, won in a mini game, or simply given you (like a king does in an RPG before you venture out for the first time.) In some games you can even dig for it. Kingdoms themselves can have a lot to grab. Sometimes you are just walking around a twisted stream of water in a village and find money at the end. The start of the stream was a little hard to find. You go under bridges and things and there your money is. It could be hidden in inconspicuous ways like in between trees a little out of the way. Sometimes only one book shelf in the game has anything in it. The player wouldn't bother looking in any book shelf because of it.  

2. **Mini games or bonus rooms** are a lot of fun if made right. Otherwise they may be very simple, such as a single room with luck of the draw (pick the right chest) or a memory game which I'd say is better. Mini games/ bonus rooms can be a break from the norm. One would have it within just one screen. Others would have it in a larger area. That larger area may have you collecting as many of a thing as possible (like was so in Donkey Kong Country when you have a limited time to collect as many bananas as possible.) At the end they are tallied up and changed into extra lives. It's simple but fun. I think a good point can be made there: what's fun is fun. Mario Bros. 3 had a memory game in it. I guess other games could use card games for mini games too. That's not something you see often but simple card games like black jack or poker could be a mini game. A new and simple card game could be made as a mini game for any game. They could have the characters on them. Final Fantasy 8 and 9 had card games. Zelda had a number of mini games. Some were claw grab item games, others had you dig as fast as you can being lucky enough to dig up a heart piece. Some were gambling based. Another was arrow based. Guessing games are sometimes in them too. Some bonus rooms are easy to get to. Some are hidden. Some are difficult to get to. Mario Land had a tricky upper platform to go into an upper door where a bonus room was. Donkey Kong country had you bursting through an area in a rino. Unless you tried that you wouldn't know it was there. Some games may have you do an extra level then you get the bonus room, like the mushroom house. Others are a part of an area you reach that was out of the way.  

3. **Improving or changing your character** is always fun. Giving them the ability to fly or throw neat weapons. To get a new appearance alone can be a nice change. I liked how Link got a new color of clothing in A Link to the Past, as simple as that was. Giving them more powerful equipment as bought after leveling up. Upgrading car parts in a racing game makes all racing games better. That time when Cecil from Final Fantasy 2 became a Paladin and his appearance completely changed, was just awesome. Final Fantasy 2 comes to mind. The whole game I was playing had a character that was kind of ugly. Cecil, that is. Then there was Cecil's quest to become a paladin, to remove all of his impurities. After he battles a shadow of himself he becomes a paladin and his image changes entirely, to a better one. I even liked how Zelda donned a new tunic in A Link To The Past. Watching him green for so long it was just good to see him in red or blue. Some games let you pick your exact appearance. From head to toe from nose to form and on top of that any clothes you want. Others do that more simply, letting you pick what clothes you wear without changing the body. There's a lot to be said about RPGs and improving your character. Too much to mention. Jobs you choose potentially let you be a lot of things each with their own abilities. The further you get into the game the more jobs become available. They are nice surprises too. There are those jobs you were hoping would come up, and maybe do. In an RPG there are also spells to learn. Those can be directed by you or just given for reaching a certain level. Older RPG games had you buy spells. In Final Fantasy 2 Tellah suddenly remembers his spells. Surprises like those are always a treat. In a side scrolling game power ups can be great to get. I'd just have to mention the frog suit in Super Mario Bros. 3. Times that by a hundred when it comes to Metroid games. If only Mario could do what Samus could! There are multiple types of guns, turning into a ball, suits that let you go into lava, missile to super missile, bomb to super bomb. Zelda gives you an arsenal of increasingly useful items. While at first you were a boy with a sword you eventually gained the master sword. While at first you just had a lantern you gained a fire rod. In an RPG it runs through the course of a game getting better and better weapons, potions, etc.  

4. **Finding the right power or weapon.** Such as Mega Man beating certain enemies with ease based on just one weapon powerful enough to do so. Or castlevania where certain weapons get you by better depending on where you are. Or Ninja Gaiden where the right weapon will make things a lot easier. Mario as well finding that hidden P Wing. What one thing couldn't be accomplished can be with the right item. Power Ups give you abilities to go further, and further access to any given area. Some foes can only be vanquished with a certain weapon, or are at least more easily beaten with a certain weapon. Only the legendary hero can obtain them. One very good thing will cause the player to think 'wow! I can do that now?' That is a good thought to evoke in a gamer. Like in Zelda that strange and large boulder always in the way, you get the Titan Glove and can just lift and toss it like a pebble. Bringing Mario the leaf is another example. Mega Man has to be mentioned as well. It is a game where it seems impossible at first but after you learn the order of things it becomes quite easier. You choose between eight bosses each with their own weapon to gain and each with their own vulnerability to a different weapon. In effect it is like a rock paper scissors game. Rock beats scissors. Scissors beat paper. Paper beats rock. In Goldeneye: 007 there was a golden gun that killed with one shot. In Zelda there was the heart piece. In Final Fantasy there was (often) Ultima as the ultimate spell. In Metroid it was the Super Bomb. Sometimes it was the light arrow that was needed against the last boss. Or it may have been the golden sword. Whatever it was, it was one last great thing. Some had you put into arena fighting to get it. You put up your best prized weapon and if you win the battle, which would be someone so powerful as to have it, then you win it. Some games literally have you finding the right powerup- those being metroidvania games. Zelda does too usually, to a lesser extent. In a beat 'em up a player may compete with another to get the energy increasing powerup or the weapon there on the ground. When there is money in the game there is almost always budgeting. Should you get the potion or the extra life? Should you get the thing that saves you from the pit, and God knows you are going to fall in one. That could also go as 'I hope this sword is good enough, affording the better one would take forever.' Could have been a failed gamble all along. Thief is such a fun job class.. Or could be. Enemies almost never drop any good thing. More than half the time they don't drop anything at all. Sometimes they drop something awesome (with a one percent chance.) Usually it is a half chance at getting something a little decent.  

5. **Hidden Things.** A place kind of out of the way. Maybe a place harder to get to but rewarding if you do. Link finding a map there. He doesn't have to have a map but it sure makes things easier. Could be hidden due to puzzles. Could be hidden in corridors. Could be off the beaten path. Could be a shortcut on the racing track. Could require a special ability to get to. I liked how in Mario World every level had two different exits, one being secret, and how that was expected. There was no guesswork there! Some hidden areas are wells you go down. Some are conspicuous cracks you bomb. Others are behind locked doors and some are just out of the way. Without being too burdensome an out of the way place could contain a great thing. There could even be a tomb all its own just for that. One of the coolest things about The Legend of Zelda was going into a grave to get the magic sword. What better place for it? The game also had bushes to burn and rafts to find, all over the place there were hidden rooms and cracks to bomb. We can't forget A Link to the Past where Link came through the trickiness of the Lost Woods and found little creatures scattered into the only sunny area. There the Master Sword rested, which he claimed. It's that one pipe you can go down. It's that one wall that falls down with a strike from a whip. It may be something that only appears with a blue moon. It may be gotten from asking the right questions. It's a thing out of place, prompting you to search. In some games it could be something no one would ever guess. Like holding the down button down where a place in front of you can't be crossed. It could require certain circumstances. Such as going to something with an item equipped. Without it nothing happens. WIth it a new scene is prompted. That's as simple as "you have a" to a "you have those?" If the mightiest of enemies can't be defeated then the player will search far and wide for the item that can do the job. As such a lot of balance should be put in a game. A "second and third option," even a "fifth and sixth." Keys may get you into it, bombs, wands, or songs may get you what you seek.  

6. **In two player games...** The co-op that is especially helpful such as in Contra. In beatemups where the players have to decide who needs the powerup. A shooter where you must hide from the other player and snatch up the bullet proof vest before they do. A music band game in general. Beating someone else's racing speed run. Outlasting the other player. Sneaking up on them. Getting the highest points at the end of a beat em up level. In a fighting game like Street Fighter, having the better strategy and better combos against the other player. Then there are board game video games, or better things like Club House Games. Thanks to the internet a second, far more than that in fact, players can compete with you. The most addictive of them being MMORPG. And something like Mario Maker where you create levels for other people to beat. Then there are things like Animal Crossing which presents itself like a community. Monopoly can be such a mess. Most board games, in fact, can be such a mess. To have to take everything out and put everything back in isn't a problem in the video game version. If you don't have friends or family to play with, if they just don't want to, then there are always players available due to the internet. That may feel less personal perhaps, you don't know the skill of the other player/s either, but they are there for times when you really want to play. Or someone can go against a computer. Chess games have been around a long time in video game form. A favorite rendition of mine was Star Wars Chess. As you could guess the characters from the movie were fitted into pawns, kings, and the rest split from good to evil. We are still waiting on a good Star Wars fighting game, or at least a better new one. Some board games are better off as video games. Wheel of Fortune for example of anything that just does it better in TV form. That's the place to look. If they can't be made into a good board game then the video game version will be more desirable. There are other little considerations like the fact that the game Risk takes so long, is large too, but a video game version contains it better. At least in board game video games the other players can't cheat! If there is one best board game put into video game form it was dungeons and dragons (the RPG of course.) RPG games for a long while didn't have more than one player playing it. That changed with the MMORPG. There are some genres you really have to consider making a two player game. Beat 'em ups for example. Fighting games without two player options border on being unquestionable.  

7. **Exploration.** Whether it is going into the upper or lower levels of a side scrolling game or obtaining an airship to go to the moon, players will have a lot to find and enjoy. Having a wide open world to venture around obtaining things is an awesome part of a game. They may have gems to find and sell, food to obtain and cook, treasure chests, a ruined kingdom with some of its things still there. Diving into ponds, digging for treasure, harvesting resources, are other elements of exploration gamers enjoy. Having a dark world counterpart where some things are the same but some aren't, opening up new paths and being able to go to a new area because of an item, are other ways you can put exploration into your game. Metroidvania games have an abundant amount of exploration in them. The map opens up based on where you have been, exposing great new areas of possibilities. They could contain something as simple as being able to super jump in order to get there. Area to area in an RPG can be most inviting. When towns and Kingdoms are all different and carry an air of personality the player wants to see what is next. One town may be suspiciously full of magicians hiding their presence. Another sea port after you cross the sea.  Within each of those towns the player may find what s/he is looking for- something surprising maybe. They'd gotten the silver sword, this town has a gold sword. They can finally move onto mid ether from regular ether. You are in the king's presence and he sends you to obtain something. You are in an area thought to be a quick grab. Only the thing regularly at the end of the cavern has become a monster somehow, and a battle ensues. Trying to go beyond a border in a game used to be impossible and there was little area to play within to begin with. As a kid playing Top Gun and After Burner I didn't understand that you couldn't just fly anywhere. I was actually expecting something beyond its borders and disappointed that nothing was there. I would also wonder about a future car game where you can go into cities and just drive all over the place in its own large world. Of course in the 8 bit days or even far beyond that it wasn't at all possible. The game world is expanding. I would say both expanding and concentrating. Empty spaces are being filled. There are games now with deep horizons. There are more areas to venture into and explore, more than ever. In the meantime it was very nice to see the world of Zelda expand. It was nice to find that heart piece and get the bottle from the guy under the bridge. It was grand to see that Mario could burst through the upper bricks, traversing across the whole level from above.  

8. **Emotional impact.** Games that make you feel things ranging from a scare to a romp. The more you play a game the better you get at it, that is a feeling of its own, like mastery. Having a countdown to destruction that makes you get to the exit as fast as possible. Astonishing graphics that impress. A sad story, a sometimes happy story, feelings of hope and other things intertwined into the story. The adrenaline pouring while you barely defeat a super boss. He cuts you down to just a little HP before you cure yourself. A list of all the feelings you can feel in a game might help: anger, happy, sad, proud, anxious, worried, surprised, curious, unsure, desire, energized, impressed, shocked, fearful, hopeful, interest, wonder, being mesmerized, laughter, etc. Making an emotional impactful game gives the game some soul. Some games are masters at making you cry. Being a romantic person at the time Final Fantasy 8 certainly had that impact on me. Rinoa was floating in space in an oxygen suit and close to death. For the first time Squall does something brave and leaves the space pod to get her. He reaches her, they embrace, certain of death, but see a dragon like spaceship closeby, to which they float, and by working together they save themselves. When an important and lovable character sacrifices themselves for the rest of the party, then their loss is felt. A despicable enemy you want revenge against has a strong impact. The feeling of becoming better and better is especially pronounced when it is that an enemy boss was almost impossible to beat, yet you did. I can't think of anything that causes more adrenaline than that. All in all beating the game altogether is the best feeling a gamer could have, especially if that last boss was a difficult one.    

9. **Immersion.** Like a world you want to be in. What you put in you get out. The desire to see where the story will go. There should be a wide variety of things you are capable of. Having a lot that can be done in any given level or area is a good thing. Having special things happen once in a blue moon keeps things fresh. Keeping things fresh is always a good game making practice. Still you don't want to have too much on the plate. It just makes the player feel like they'll never figure everything out and wonder about what they should do, or that they are just unable to appreciate it all, wishing it was more limited in its design. In other words we want the player to be more decisive. Feeling like you are a part of the whole experience is great. Again- keeping things fresh is a good way to make games. That can be like giving the player access to other areas through an airship, but first a boat, and before that a raft. It's like classical music: it's better to introduce all of the instruments gradually, one at a time. Likewise learning more spells over time or new abilities gained according to how they are obtained.  

10. **Like of the game/acceptance and appreciation of it.** That means that the graphics aren't intolerable (for me that's when characters have bulbous heads, for one.) A game that can be appreciated. The game is fair. If you work at it you can win without burdening yourself with difficulty. They do not impose too great a difficulty. Such as if the player levels up enough they can expect to win. It doesn't make you lost and wandering around everywhere to learn where you are supposed to be. The voice acting isn't so terrible and repetitious that you'd rather just turn the sound off. The player enjoys the music, it isn't too simple or annoying if it has to be heard often. The game can be figured out. It doesn't have you going around in circles fetching numerous things just to advance the story. The game doesn't require precise controls like in platforming. Glitches can be like an ugly smear on an otherwise good portrait. Compulsion should be limited- so that the player doesn't have to bend over backwards to get a few coins for a potion. Going to the other side of the game world every time you need one is no better.  

11. **Replayability.** Leave the player wanting more. Giving them a second quest. Having a percentage based win. Having a certain amount of things to find- there are 100 of them in the game. Having variety is especially important. The villages, the levels, differences, are noticeable. I remember just one thing that brought me back to Final Fantasy 6 again and again. That was finding the one esper that I didn't have. If the player isn't too bored to go through a whole thing again then it wouldn't bother them to. If it is a dull and tedious thing then the player won't think 'time to play again!' but 'not this game again.' Having things in the game the player didn't notice before but is impressed to find- things that somewhat are naturally found, some trick they didn't know about, some aspect they thought was a problem given a simple solution. Those are pieces of advice the game should give instead of an annoying fairy (navi.) Moments of pause and ease helps. Maybe that is why bonus rooms are so inviting- not so much for the extra life it gives then just a break from the norm. That pause shouldn't be something boring though like overdrawn text/ story. Leveling up is an excellent time kill for all true RPG fans. It has its flaws however. They've been working on that. Too much repetition is maybe the worst. In any area there are maybe just a few different things to fight.. Again and again. That hasn't been worked on so much. Other problems have found solutions though. For example not having to fight a weak and waste of time enemy by having them be scared away. If you are much more powerful than them the game knows it and has them run from you. That's good because you leveled up enough anyway. There was a good fix to the problem that you really don't want to do a battle, go back to the overworld, encounter again- rinse and repeat. This game called Bravely Default 2 remedied that with monster-alluring things. They were lured in multiple battles of a monster of your choosing. For example nectar for bees would cause battle after battle for any bee you encounter. New RPG games make the battles super fast if you want. You can also auto-fight. They all added a lot more fun to the whole process.  

12. **Choosing your character.** It is very nice to have a good amount of characters to choose from. One for every type of person. In street fighter you can pick a character from your nation. There are characters from China, USA, Russia, etc. There are male, female, large, small, martial artists, sumo wrestlers, boxers, you name it. In Castlevania you can play as a different character, like one that can become a bat and fly around. It isn't much unlike Super Mario Bros 2 where you can choose between Mario, Luigi, Toad, or Peach. Luigi jumps higher. Peach floats. That leads us into beat 'em up games. One is fast, another is strong but slow. One has his magic, another has her's. In an RPG you have a lot of choices character wise. The longer the game goes on the more characters join your party. Ever get that item that you thought was useless, then a new character comes in and you find s/he could use it?  

## Developing a Theme and World  

Just when you thought all game themes had been used, along comes Cup Head, a game resembling very early cartoons. Castlevania set itself within Dracula's Castle and incorporated other famed monsters. First came the theme and thereafter everything else just fell into place. Some are inspired by other games but you'd never know, such as Ninja Gaiden being inspired by Castlevania. The setting could be a world war like in the shooter "1943" or many first person shooters. They may not be based on anything previous to begin with, such as the case with the Mushroom Kingdom. It can be a tropical island game with a tribal looking guy. Could be based in prehistoric times like in Joe and Mac. Could be based on grecian myths like Icarus. There are many options there and it just matters what appeals to you the most. Even if it is entirely new it can be inspired by older things, piece by piece, just altered the way you want them if not totally the same.  
Know your interests well and you will never lack imagination. Being involved helps, like having the desire to create neat new enemies for your game, neat power ups too and all else.  
Typically levels and places in the game shift/ change. Level 1 an overworld, level 2 an underground level, with underwater levels fitted in, for example. That's so in all genres of games. Like in an Adventure game there are dungeons below. Games should be more than just one kind of thing repeated over and over. Even if it is Arthur climbing up a rotating castle for a change.    
If you take books and movies into account it's easy to see there are a vast amount of fantasy worlds out there. Some based more or less on the actual world, others completely different, set in places far, far away. In video games you find Dracula's Castle (Castlevania), The Devil's Realm (Ghouls and Ghosts), a world of robots in Mega Man, Mushroom Kingdom and the world of Hyrule.  
You could have a typical world or one all of your making. It goes as far as imagination will take it. There is Alice in Wonderland, The Land of the Mushroom Kingdom, then there is your world just waiting to be made. The whole premise can be started out small if you like. If you want to introduce things slowly at a time from there you can. Just focus first on making a good start. Building upon that is the easier thing to do. Someday it may be over-exhausted. I believe that Mario games are an example for that. They are great games but there's not much new to be had of them. Everything that can be done has been. No longer will we marvel at the goomba that now has wings. Mario can fly? That was more "Mario can fly?!" then it is today. It had a good run. From one fleshed out world came so many others. It was brought into many excellent kart games and smash brothers games, even olympic games after a certain point. But it has certainly lost its "new appeal." It at least shows you how far and how fast games could go. If Mickey Mouse did the things Mario did.. Or went to the places he did.. Games don't just present a story. They take you there.  

## Developing A Story  

Sometimes only a little story is just fine. Some classic games had no story at all, such as Pac Man. The sum of a character in a fighting game may amount to just a paragraph of text. While some games practically contain a novel, such as Final Fantasy 6. The formula for a good story isn't too difficult. It may require that you rewrite things while programming a game, as the story is just a dead end or you suddenly come across a better idea that conflicts with the rest of it. Surprise elements are a very good thing and can range from an enemy being a relative, as it turns out (much in Star Wars style.) A person you thought was a friend was serving your enemy all along. Maybe they were just mind controlled as you discover later. As with all stories a plot is there. What will be your plot? Will it be an evil king pursuing you? Saving the princess from the dragon? Beating an entity that has caused chaos in the world? The pursuit of revenge? The struggle to restore peace? And there are plots one at a time such as finding the fabled sword needed for final victory against your foe.  
The main objective itself is just part of the story as we learn from characters who join our party each having their own backstory and personalities. Motives are drawn between them, as one character is "in it" for reasons different from the others. There are many enemies in the game in a similar way. They are each their own thing. One a dark elf, another a dragon, or whatever you want them to be. The Four Fiends from Final Fantasy 4 are brought to mind. It can be an army you are against.  
And perhaps you are apprehended and placed in a prison, which you must escape. Maybe your cellmate knew you all along. He was told a vision of what was to come. So all along while locked up he had been digging a holl for your arrival. That was a part of the Dragon Quest 11 story.  
One common plot line is that you are the destined savior of a people. When you come of age you are suddenly thrust into a quest. The crystals of the world are fading. You must restore them. An enemy is just growing more and more powerful. Common as they may be, they seem to work every time.  
Here is a list for possible story elements: Remember that plots aren't so easily defined in a video game. What is a plot in a video game may not at all be in a movie or a book. For that reason I will include "video game settings" in this list.  

## Ideas for Story Development and Story Settings  
1. A merciless act was committed against a loved one, and you want revenge.  
2. A corrupt king is gaining power and must be overthrown.  
3. The world is facing ruin and if it isn't saved it will die.  
4. Your loved one has become sick and you must go out to find the herbs that will save her.  
5. Friends sacrificed themselves to save your team.  
6. An ominous evil has returned.  
7. There is a mysterious power behind the king controlling him.  
8. You are The Chosen.  
9. There is a hidden magic/warrior/underground/on the moon race.  
10. A prince or princess on the run. The Chosen One on the run.  
11. Magic has returned to the land. Monsters have returned to the land.  
12. An android race has taken over.  
13. An alien race to defeat.  
14. Someone stole your treasure and you want it back.  
15. You have to sneak back into town.  
16. You have to prove yourself to higher beings in order to receive help.  
17. The story alludes to a main enemy that turns out to be your sibling.  
18. Hell has broken out all over the land, literally or not.  
19. You are a demon yet against demons, are a vampire yet a vampire hunter.  
20. A character is an assassin for hire against an evil only you can defeat.  
21. The quest to destroy your evil side. Meeting your evil self in a place and defeating it.  
22. The quest to find lost friends after you all have been separated.  
23. Only one has the vehicle you need to go further, you must gain their help.  
24. It turns out a character is an alien or a sumunor.  
25. A character discovers their own kind after a lifetime of not knowing anything about them.  
26. You wash up onto an unknown land and now seek your way back home.  
27. If you want someone to help you, you have to help them first.  
28. You are a part of a rebel team that the king is after.  
29. The main enemy is trying to open up a new dimension in which she can rule.  
30. A major enemy was a good person all along, just fully possessed by an evil entity.  
31. A character that has lost their kingdom but late in the game gets it back.  
32. An evil shape shifting wizard has turned the people of a kingdom into strange things. You set out to defeat that wizard and undo the curse.  
33. Forced into marriage but wanting someone else.  
34. Going against the norms of the world, not accepting a suicidal pilgrimage in the end.  
35. The people are being mind controlled by an evil force and acting strange and barbaric.  
36. You thought it was a treaty but it was just a trick to get you on their side.  
37. Suddenly a hidden city appears, one technologically advanced. None even knew a city was there, as it was cloaked.  
38. The old "I have your loved one and if you want her back you better come to me with the (  )."  
39. The enemy has managed to open up the Dark World or set upon the world a great catastrophe.  
40. You were poisoned by a person and black mailed for the antidote.  
41. There are demons of an evil entity after you.  
42. A character was transformed into a toad who is after becoming human again.  
43. A caged person agrees to help you or solve your problem if you release him.  
44. A wizard friend takes your dead body and brings it back to life.  
45. Magicians and mages who are a part of a cult. Maybe your main enemy is their leader. Or maybe you defeat them all to take their prized treasure.  
46. All along you were together as friends in an orphanage and have forgotten it. What made you forget may have been using a new technology or something.  
47. The light of the world is going dim.  
48. While incognito your team mate spills the beans and reveals who hired you.. In an awful blunder.  
49. Setting the stage for an assasination attempt on an evil dictator. As such, going through the sewers and sneaking up to them.  
50. You discover you were a prince or princess all along. Or your friend turns out to be a King who was hiding the fact.  
51. Elements of being framed and demonized by it.  
52. Suddenly remembering your old spells.  
53. You were the child of two different races, one human and one magical, and your powers are just waking up.  
54. Unexpected help in the nick of time.  
55. A main character dies in the game.  
56. A magician corrupted by magic he shouldn't use, yet it's made him greatly more powerful.  
57. Why is the player in the fighting tournament?  
58. You are a part of a proud warrior race that has rebelled against more powerful beings enslaving them.  
59. You wash up on shore to an unknown land, even an unknown planet. You wake up in the game rising from bed.  
60. You travel to the planet you came from to discover it has been destroyed by an alien race.  
61. You are adrift in deep space trying to return home. You are looking for faster speed equipment and occasionally face fights against local enemies.  
62. Zombie game.  
63. A vampire virus instead of a zombie one. The whole world has become vampires. You alone have not, it seems. During the day you venture out to get what you need such as garlic for your door and do what you need to find humans that survived the vampire virus. Just like the movie "The Last Man on Earth."  
64. Your memory of the past was restricted by something. Those of your comrades too. A form of magic may have caused it or a great being who flung you back into a recent pass. The gamer knows what they did before that, the characters just woke up in their bed one day thinking it was a dream.  
65. An item you found turns out to be of monumental importance. Something like the ring in The Hobbit.  

## Types of Characters And Their Nature:  

* **The Main Hero** : He or she may be a fated hero. They were born into that role which is slowly revealed to them over time. They may have been forced into the role of a hero due to their loved ones being slain. They may have the power to help that others do not. They might be decisively against an evil entity, a dictator for example. Their motive might be just a passion to do good, to bring about good. It may be agreed among their friends that something should be done against corrupt things, things that must be stopped. They may have nothing else to lose. Some heroes aren't exactly role models or brave. Some of them have to grow into their position. Along the way they learn what they need to in order to survive and help their friends. Along the way they become stronger. They may have begun as insecure and selfish but gradually turn into a person most admirable.  

* **The Sub Heroes** : For a brief moment in the game everything may rest on him or them. They may do a thing that the main hero cannot. They could have a more significant role in the game too. They may have secretly aided you against the enemy and weren't seen again in the game. They might even have sacrificed themselves for that cause.  

* **The Main Villain** : By rule a villian does evil. They could be either psychotic or crazy. If not those then at least powerful and immoral. They are power hungry. They want more power and set out to get it. The hero must stop him. They could be an abomination from hell or the leader of a more powerful alien race who are enemies with the human race. They could also be an evil elf king. Human or not they love destruction and slaughter. Seeking a thing that endows a great power, the player must get to it first. A good villain is one you hate. A good villain is one you want to overthrow. They have an element of scum to them. They are haughty throughout. They consider you lower than them and a waste of time. At the end of the game they are proven wrong. Never all along could they be convinced to stop. They have come to be considered powerful, a god, by the player. Nevertheless they have gotten the power to defeat him, do so, and all of the evil in the game is then gone.    

* **The Sub Villains** : Could be the lesser version of the greater self. Could include the smaller monsters/devils/aliens than the greater. Castlevania made Dracula the prime enemy and before him were the lesser ones such as Frankenstien. Another example is Bowser and his kids. One Kingdom is the prime foe with lesser kingdoms presenting their own lesser troubles. In Final Fantasy 6 Kefka at first seemed just the underdog. He had a touch of madness that propelled him into greater power than the king he served. In Final Fantasy 4 the main enemy had the Four Fiends.  

* **The Anti-Hero** : The two things that make an anti hero are that they have a glimmer of humanity and are vulnerable. They have good in them deep down. They may be aggressive against their foes but that's just because they have a sense of justice. Vegeta from Dragon Ball Z is a perfect example of an Anti Hero. Also there is the movie Falling Down. Batman has been portrayed as an anti hero himself, in certain conditions. These characters mostly do bad for the sake of good but are not bloodthirsty or anything. You can relate to the antihero. "He killed my (   ) and deserves to die." "Nobody is doing anything about (this bad) thing, so I will." Maybe The Punisher is a better example than Batman. The charming thing about them is that they aren't doing good for the sake of good but are fighting for good while following no rules about it.  

* **The Savior or Redeemer** : The forces that be, whether they are higher powers or ageless beings, have set you on your course. They knew you all along. Sometimes they didn't know you all along but did after you proved yourself to them. Maybe you had to strip away from your bad side like Cecil did in becoming a Paladin. The Sword in the Stone idea is that only the truly worthy could uproot it. Her or his role may have come to be known by "being born with the mark on their right hand." One common idea is that you were the reincarnation of a past hero. The crystal called out to you, or the tree. It told you who you are and what you are to do.  

* **The Band of Friends** : (Those and just any friend in a game.) They all have their own reasons to be in it. One member may just be after a treasure or hired help. Another is objectively against someone and what they are doing. They might just be doing their duty. They may be a part of a whole team just because they are related to someone else in the group. One may have been drawn into the group due to her powers, who would have not been invited in without it. Your lineup could be a king from a fallen kingdom and his remnants. They may all be banded together for different purposes though still share one major purpose. Friends may increase throughout the game until all those you helped during it come together to aid you in the end. They might have nothing for you but wisdom regarding your quest and advice as to what you should do.  
Knowing who you are, they might give you an item or weapon you need. In a more simple game they are just playable characters each with their own attributes. Such as one Ninja Turtle having a staff and another a sword. Or one character can jump higher, another is faster than the other, while one can float. Beat 'em ups can be divided between a bulky strong character or another option of someone more dexterous. In Golden Axe each playable character had their own elemental power.  

* **The Fool** : Ever play a game where you thought you were up against someone incredibly powerful based on the way they look and talk to you? Then after you fight them they may be beaten just by shedding 1 HP? It is like a samurai who thinks he knows it all. Even a wrestler, like Satan/ Hercule in Dragon Ball Z. It is a self professed warrior who can't show the goods when the time comes as they were just fakes. In Final Fantasy 8 the main characters were hired to go against a certain dictator. The main team were among SeeD, a hired soldier establishment. In the midst of an assasanation of the dictator Zell blurts out that they are with SeeD, which endangered the whole team behind them.  
A little pride goes a long way. They thought all along that they were the hero. Wherever they go they think 'here comes the hero!' While his friend beside him is the hero, not him, and he is afraid to admit it.  
Someone who shouldn't be granted power sometimes. does. They could be an over-serving goofy soldier like in Final Fantasy 9. Duty keeps them from seeing things as they really are. They may be nothing more than pawns. In fact they may be put into power for just that reason. They are both dumb and easy to use. Dumb people make a good show and "all the world loves a clown," as you can surmise from TV.  

* **The King or Queen** : Some games have the King/Queen/Prince/ss not knowing that they are. They came from a royal line, and may have been taken somewhere else as a child to save them from an onslaught. Yet they have remnants of servants left who know who they are, somewhere, and may come across them and their kingdom begins to be re-established. Some kingdoms may be aligned with your team, others not so, those that are will give you help in the game. In games Kings have been possessed by an evil power, not acting as they normally would. All Kings have soldiers, and some soldiers are especially powerful, like royal guards. The King's top knight might be hunting you down in the game. Some are after things that impart great power like espers in Final Fantasy 6. They are wanting to rule the whole world itself through them. That was certainly more interesting than the same thing in Final Fantasy 4 which was just crystals. Espers were a more poignant part of the game. There may be a prince or underling in the game after the King's power, and after getting it, turns a good kingdom into an evil kingdom. The King may think he's the top dog in it all but is just being used by such a person.  

* **The Wizard or Mage** : Carries that power that none of the other characters have. Wizards are more appreciated than sword wielding warriors. They bring with them better graphical qualities. You never know what spell they may learn next. The spells themselves may be learned by leveling up, bought as a scroll in a shop, or within hidden esper stones. They do more than attack or cure. Their magic can shield, bring back to life, automatically bring back to life too, make you float to remain unharmed by an earthquake attack, you name it. There are always more powerful or more useful spells to gain. Some are apprentices. They have a good teacher, too. They are set forth on a quest mainly to become great magicians.  

* **The Warrior or Knight** : The warrior brings with it swords, shields, and armor. These become increasingly powerful throughout the game. When at last you thought you've gotten the best sword you find it can be tempered into one even more powerful.  

* **The Protector** : A character who is fated to save the world is protected by those who know. Those could be a godlike presence or a human with special magical insight regarding them. One character may love another and naturally protect them on that basis. An evil power might be particularly against them as they are a threat to their power. They have magic where others do not. They are from a royal line they thought was eradicated. Friends protect each other in the game and if one of their own is captured they will do everything they can to free them. They may have seen a person in the game being abused and decided to step in. After they did they gained a helpful friend. They may have been assigned to help.  

* **The Fated Hero** : Wandering through the garden the character found something hidden and began hearing a voice that they were to set out on a journey to save the world. They are the reincarnation of an ever returning hero. This may be their first time through or their third. They could have washed up on shore, shores guided by gods. It has all come together for them one day, the day their whole life changed. A series of events led them there. They may have been marked for death by a time traveling entity like in Terminator. The last survivors of their kingdom may have come out of hiding to restore their power, once they can.  

## The Character Motives  

* **Has nothing left to lose** : They live in the slums. Their king is too harsh. Life is cruel to them under a dictatorship's rule. They have nothing left to lose. A kingdom may have killed and ravaged an entire village. Returning home you see the whole village has been pillaged and set on fire.  

* **Is after something** : Just like Han Solo they just want money (at least at first until he sympathizes enough with the resistance to help it.) He has a double motive as he's got to pay Jabba The Hut or else get hunted down by his bounty hunters. They may be a bounty hunter themself. Something may have been stolen by them and they want it back. Loyal to their friends they may just be trying to set them free from prison. They may be after something of particular power. They may be after a fabled treasure. They could be trying to resurrect a friend or remove their curse with a phoenix stone/ remedy. They could be after one thing after another as is common in games. "Fetch quests" however are not often liked in games. That could be the magic sword or the magic crystals. They could be looking for a lost friend or friends after the world fell to ruin.  

* **Wants revenge** : After all their whole village was burned down, they were enslaved, or their loved ones were slain. Maybe they just want their banana hoard back. In a large part of the game they are looking for someone who did what they did. They may be quite formidable at first. They may have even found them only to be thrust away like pests and warned not to return. So they gather power elsewhere and return to them as more formidable opponents.  

* **Wants to set things right** : Cecil fought for an immoral king. The king sought magic, imparting crystals. He'd have Cecil and his soldiers get them at any cost, and slaughtered innocent people in so doing. Returning from such an indenture he questioned the king's motives, directly. The king stripped him of his authority over The Red Wings and sent him to a small village. He was told he was just delivering a simple thing but it turned out to be a magic fire bomb that set the whole village on fire. There was one survivor, a little girl. He left the kingdom and came back with full power against it, eventually, including significant help from The Summoner Girl. One thing that a character did led to a catastrophe and must now remedy it all. They just want to help any bad matter, even a horrible problem.  

* **Is following after a mystery** : Such as Adol Christin in Y's 3: Wanderers from Ys. Him and his friend are in town and spot a fortune teller. Curious, they approach it and Adol has his fortune told. The crystal ball bursts and she fearfully yells out "Galahad!" A mystery begins to unfold... A character may have just washed up on shore. Finding themself in a strange land they can't help but inquire how they got there. That could be like the game Myst or Dragon Quest. Link's Awakening is another example. "The whole thing was just a dream" idea. Could be among the oldest stories of all, The Odyssey. In The Odyssey it happens again and again to Odyseus. He's just trying to find his way home. In time he forgets. Then at last when he has served his purpose he returns home. The people in his world do not understand all he went through and never could. A moment hasn't even passed, he was returned to the exact time he left.  
They might be on a treasure hunt. They could be looking for a powerful spell. They could be looking for something rumored to exist and follow after the clues. One mystery may lead to another as they bring the pieces together.  
  
* **Is coming to terms** : At first one may have just been hired to help but s/he comes to find them friends. At first they ask "why me?" when they are told they are The Chosen One. Maybe they have the special power or position they need but it takes a lot to convince them to help.  

* **Is destined to act. Is compelled to act** : After all, they are the chosen one. A mystery quickly unfolds before them. Their time has come to start off on their purpose. They are known by mysterious forces that only they can do what they must set out to do. Their objective could be to save someone (often a princess) or the land they live in itself.  

* **Is part of a rebel team** : and that team has the objective of overthrowing a bad ruler. They may have found influence from these people to help them. The objective of the rebels could be to assassinate a person of a dictatorship. They may be collecting all the power and whatever valuable resource they need to accomplish their purpose. It may not be so much against a bad ruler or something but could also be something like  a gang of thieves.  

* **Wants to make things right** : They may have caused wrong. They might want to rectify their past. They may feel that they have failed someone and do not want that to happen again. Or they start to want to make things right. Their hearts are starting to change. What was once unimportant to the character starts to be. They begin to think and act less selfishly. They may even start acting more boldly to correct wrongs all around them.  

* **Wants something back** : Something was taken from them and they set out to get it back. It could even have been a loved one- like an evil king forcing your girlfriend into a forced marriage. Could have just been a small thing but was something you highly valued personally. Their whole kingdom may have been taken from them. They might have been a prince/ss that escaped "living to fight another day." Your power may have been taken from you. Your penise is being mortal, once a god, now tasked with getting your godly powers back.  

* **Your help was hired** : You may have been an excellently qualified person to do something and so paid to accomplish it. You may have been a part of a hired group as well, working together for a certain objective. It could just be going into a cave or something where any normal person wouldn't dare tread. Or it may be a hired assasination. They could have you looking for a person. Could be just a lost pet.  

* **Has had enough** : They were brought to a breaking point. "The king has gone mad." Their parents expect too much of them. They want something new in life. They just need a change in life, something more exciting. They always wanted to do something and finally chose to do it, and it is the start of a great adventure. After all they have a plain, ordinary, and mediocre life. They just want something different and perhaps one day fate shines upon them.  

* **An offer they can't refuse** : One that lands them in a job or profession which changes the course of their lives. The job may be an inscrutable one but it is too rewarding not to pass over. Unfortunately when the time comes that they want to leave they are fraught with danger.  

* **Wants to save something** : They may set out to fix the magical well which provides water to their village- without doing so they will not have water. That's just one example that can go many different ways. It could be "the wind crystal" as we saw at the start of Final Fantasy 5. More than a village needing a monumental thing to survive the whole world may need it- a thing, some change, and maybe the world doesn't know it, but you do. Your team does. So while being thought of as crazy fools you do what needs to be done and eventually save the planet or at least your people. You might be after the potion to cure a disease or undo a curse. You might be trying to save a loved one that way. You may be trying to free a friend from prison, a loved one from an evil being.  

* **You are trying to be the most qualified** : Your boss or the king will only have the best. You could be in a tournament or a mission to prove your worth. It could be a series of them. Could be the old troupe of collecting the orbs/ crystals to indicate that you are the chosen one. Instead of a fantasy realm that could be things done for a crime boss. Could be something so simple as in Pilot Wings where you are after a pilot license. Then there is Pokemon and the badge collecting objective. Only after beating several enemies in a fighting game can you face the final and most difficult one. A lot of games make it where only the best will do.  
  
## The Enemy Motives  

Why do the enemies do what they do?  
* **They want total power** : Power that can come from some magical source.  
* **They are a returning evil** : They return at every age to try again.  
* **They are hateful and sadistic** : They want to destroy everything.  
* **They are greedy** : Only a little will not do even if they have to destroy the planet to get what they want.  
* **They will not take disobedience from you, the character** : Yet you stand in their way and become a threat.  
* **They are acting on orders** : They are soldiers that have been sent to capture you.  
* **You tried to assassinate them** : Now they want revenge.  
* **They wanted something of yours** : They took it. It is a source of power for them.  
* **They wanted to make a harsh and brutal point** : So they burned down a village.  
* **They are influenced by evil** : An evil that guides them into serving them/ releasing them.  
* **They are possesse** : Or they are misguided. They are either possessed by a power or directly so.  
* **They are against you "the chosen one"** : Because the profits say you will be king and the king doesn't want that.  
* **They are mad** : And so they only want to destroy.  
* **They are monsters, demons, or aliens** : They want to take over the world. They hate the human race.  
  
## The Actual Player's Motives 

What the actual people playing the game are playing it for.  

* **They want to level up** : It is a thing more rewarding than ever. On its inception it didn't extend any further than HP, and maybe MP, but has since become much more robust. The player can now add to whatever stats they want to, can gain magic by leveling up, gain new abilities that way, and more. As a result there are a series of things to level up that go far beyond just HP and character improvement is frequent, yet different from thing to thing. It is almost like a meditative gameplay (grinding) not demanding too much attention or difficulty yet diverse with reward. There is money to be gained as well that makes leveling up all the more fun. They want the best new sword they can have. They want the best armor, the best equipment, and they know they are going to need a bundle of curative items. They are about to face an enemy boss and they don't only want to beat it, they want to hit it out of the park. There's a kind of mystery to it- they don't know what they will receive when they reach the next level. A new spell? A new ability? And sometimes the enemies will drop something valuable after defeating them. A player can be at least a little proud after they reach the point of easily defeating what was once difficult to.  

* **The player is involved in the story** : The story could be too good to keep the player away. They want to know what will become of them. There could be unexpected elements- enough to make the player lose their breath, are breathtaking. Those things you never would have considered but even if you did consider it there is no really knowing until it happens. The story could in fact have very common plot twists- they turn out to be your father or brother, but until it happens it is all just guessing- maybe a hope in fact for the player. Some like romantic stories. I myself do. That's why Final Fantasy 8 is my favorite in the series (conversely though that is why the tenth game is a favorite for others.) The most touching scene I have seen in a game was from it. The one with Rinoa and Squall trapped in space with space suits and running out of oxygen. Often in stories who you thought was the boss of the whole game turned out to be their underlying instead. Such as the case with Kefka in Final Fantasy 6. "It isn't over until the fat lady sings." You think something is done but then a whole other story unfolds. Kefka actually did destroy the world in that game. At least unto the point that barely anything remained of it.  
My advice is to have a good start- one that draws the player right in. One full of action. One that precisely lands the player in a good story. My advice is to have good plot twists. Make what is evil truly so. Give them an aura of evil even around them- of those such as their followers (the Yiga clan from Breath of the Wild certainly comes to mind.) Incorporate a love story if it'll help the overall game or one of friendship. Provide the backstory needed in order to understand the player. If you don't then the player will not have a connection between them and the characters in the game. And give the player a sense of what they are fighting for/ working towards.  

* **Wants the next powerup, tool, or ability** : After all they open up new areas they couldn't get to before. Some power ups are neat to use. Some really do make you feel more powerful. Some just give you a desired freedom you lacked before getting them. They could be as rich as a modern metroidvania game (of which even every last enemy gives you a new ability, similar to their own, after beating them a number of times.) Or as simple yet as fun as the frog suit in Super Mario Bros. 3. The player knows they are upon a greater weapon- it is sometimes a guarantee. They don't know what it will be. They just know that there is one in every dungeon. And so it is there along with an exciting new thing you can do in the game. It kind of relieves the player of some mystery- why this or that was there, which with your new tool you now know why. In the meantime you may have gotten bored in an area. After finding the right item you now have a whole new area to tackle. An airship is a good surprise. Being at once limited you can now go about anywhere you want which before was so much more limited.  

* **Wants  to see what comes next** : I would like to bring to mind the original Ninja Gaiden trilogy. In a time before cutscenes it had them. They had diverse levels too which is important in keeping things interesting. Along with that the game was very pattern based- had complex patterns perhaps, but entirely predictable over time. It's a next level thing where it is that the next level could be something totally unexpected. Making the levels too much the same will not have such a quality to it. In an RPG it is seeing what weapons, items, magic, etc. to come. That and the next part of the story. In a racing game it is in what the next track will be. Good fighting games have extra fighters you didn't know were there. Sometimes it is about what the next enemy boss will be. If it is a good metroidvania game one of the best things in them is that.  

* **They want to do the best they can** : This entails a number of things such as: beating the game, getting the most points, speed running, getting 100 percent completion, making records like a timed race course/ having the quickest time, doing better than anyone else especially through internet based gameplay, or just generally by being a completionist. They want to get better in a game like in a fighting game. They want to build the most highly populated city in sim city. They want to get better at sport games . For them it can be a whole competition in the online world and this is becoming more and more so, much like two peas in a pod. As for speed running, some devote their whole life to it. It is a wonder to me why games don't have speed running appropriate settings with how common a kind of game play it is  for so many (settings to time the game, unfinishable without full completion, deathless requirements and things such as those.)  
They may have a lot to look through in order to be at their best. Like in an RPG game where it is that any given treasure chest, book shelf, person, pot, barrel, or whatever else can potentially contain a great power boosting item. There may be secrets laced everywhere- a large number of hidden areas that keep the player looking and looking. Some games are very lending towards esports. Others less so. Then there have been modifications to the game in order to suit them (for example what is called a randomizer and also ROM hacks that deliberately make the game more difficult.) Competition has never been as possible as it is now. What did we have in the 80s? Well for one, scoreboards in arcade machines saved as long as the power was kept on. As for consoles and the same thing there actually was a time when gamers had to take pictures of their points on screen, mail them in, and hopefully have them published. Certainly times have changed.  

* **They are enjoying the game** : The music is good and relaxing. The action is there and engaging. It is a good escape from ordinary life. It is a game worth investing time in. There is a lot to explore. There is a lot to find. There is a lot to collect. They have a sense of progress that moves them forward. The game doesn't bore them but keeps them involved. Most importantly the game is fun. It is easy to control. It plays well. It isn't fraught with too much difficulty but strikes a good balance. It strikes a good balance overall. It's suitable for all kinds of players. Things can be adjusted or modified accordingly. It can be personalized if it is the kind of game that should have that. There are a lot of options for the player and "different strokes for different folks."  
As for music- It isn't annoying but pleasant. It isn't minimalist or repetitive. And it fits the mood. As for action- It is such that it carries the player away in it. They then act on instinct, perhaps fueled by adrenaline. It demands their focus. And it doesn't overstay its welcome. As for "the escape"- It is a nice world to be in and rich with content. The more that the gamer can see the word through the eyes of the character the better. The more naturally they relate to the character the better. It is good to put them into shoes that fit or in other words "fits like a glove." As for having it being a game worth investing time in- If there is a lot to find and use this isn't any problem. Things kept fresh is a good ruote. Things made diverse are, too, as it gives the player the craving for any upcoming thing. The challenge is there. The player overcomes it. They are proud. Then the next may have carried over pride for all of that in a reoccurring fashion. Player's perspective of progress is important towards investing them in the game. Exploration, finding, and collecting, are the most important things to implement if the player is going to have something to return for. As for reducing boredom- That would involve keeping out boring text/ drawn out talk. It happens when things don't seem to go anywhere. It happens when things are not any different than the last. It could be a way overboard fetch questing game- a common shame for so many otherwise great RPG games. It is often so when the game attempts to be too lifelike at the cost of imagination. That comes at the price of not doing anything you wouldn't do in the ordinary world. Some games are so good that a person could play them for years and yet keep coming back. Some games call for a good story through and through. While some games don't have such a problem with the player getting bored (like sports or card games.)  
As for what I would call a fun game I guess the best approach is to say what made certain games fun. Like Super Mario Bros. Kids at the time loved the stuff. It wasn't in any normal world. Like in a cartoon things didn't have to make sence. The best cartoons had ninja turtles and smurfs after all. Why would a piranha plant be coming out of a pipe? Nobody asked, they just enjoyed it being  there. Super Mario Bros had these things where you could bust blocks- and who knew what was in them until you did. You could even skip a whole level by getting yourself to the top of a screen. In my opinion the original Bowser from that game looked evil- in contrast to the more cartoon look he would later receive. He threw axes at you. You killed him by dropping him into lava.  
To quickly go over Super Mario Bros. 3: first off there were so many games riding off the coattails of the first game. These all too common side scrollers that didn't add much to the original concept. I think what hindered them the most was lack of imagination. So many game makers have the fault of making things too plain. They must have worked overtime in Super Mario Bros 3 because it was leaps and lunges far beyond the original game. They took what was before and added to it. You could now pick up the shells and toss them. Even sliding down a slope was a nice touch. The frog suit was nice and useful too, making slow ordinary swimming into swimming much faster and versatile. It was always nice to find a pipe up above that you could only get to while flying. That or coin rich areas up above. Through a world map they gave you options of which levels to play with some not necessary at all, though containing a secret in it if you do. There were fun mini games and other things to find on the world map. There were branching levels to play before but never done in such a way as that. It goes to show you what a little imagination can do. So from what I have learned about what they were doing to make a good game I have come up with these questions. If you can answer these questions then there is no doubt your game will be good. Being able to answer these questions will make you a better game maker.  

## The Most Important Questions For A Game Maker To Find Answers For  

Ten important questions a game maker must be able to answer in order to be at their best.  

1. "how can this be done better?" And "how can this be done both better and differently?" This is taking any preexisting thing and doing it your own way. Doing it in a way that feels better. It can turn out to be much more different than the original idea too, and that's fine. What you don't want to do is make something too much the same. Sometimes however a little difference makes a big difference. This is the answer to questions such as how can random battles be made better, how can any typical powerup be made better, how can any map be made better, how can any preexisting racing game be made better, and the more you answer it the more evolved your game will be.  

2. "Instead of (   ) how about a (   )?" This is a good question to answer when it comes to originality. You can take a whole game this way and make it totally different piece by piece. It requires imagination. It also builds imagination though. That is as long as you come up with something nicely different. Something that surpasses the limited imagination of someone who only turns coins into diamonds. The source to transition into something else is easy and widely available. The change you put on them to make them better is the more difficult thing but comes easily enough. Instead of a pipe a (   ), instead of a fireball a (   ), instead of a plain axe or holy water doing just this it can also do that. They are the same general concept sometimes just in different forms such as instead of going down a pipe you go down in a well. Instead of a sword in the stone an axe in the ancient living tree. Taking the axe out brings it back to life.Instead of a ball and chain (chain chomp) there is a skull on a chain that does the same thing.  

3. "What can make this area more fun?" Having a sun chase you around would make the desert area more fun. Having a frog suit would make the water area more fun. Or a large fish coming out of the water to swallow you. Avoiding falling boulders makes a mountainous area more fun- or at least a little more challenging. The gamer might have a large assortment of things to use in any given area, collected one at a time. If intuition calls for something then they can guess what it is, like a crack in a wall that needs to be bombed to pass through. Also, platforms of many kinds. Some bounce or spin around or disappear and reappear. Uppercutting your enemy in the spiked pit below was what Mortal Kombat did in this regard. There should be more to any given level/area than just some little thing. Rather make it multifaceted.  

4. "How can this old idea be done differently?" That is, both different and better than before. That could be like turning random battles into something else. It could be as grand as making Castlevania a Metroidvania. That could be like turning Space invaders into Galaga. There are many examples of how people took things and made them much better. Whether the game overall or how Final Fantasy 4 introduced the active time battle. Before that all random battles were turn taking but in ATB you had to keep on your feet. How can you make a dungeon better? Well with a map and compass.  

5. "How else can you use a (   )?" This is a question that will make anything more robust. It will make items, weapons, tools, and other things in the game more versatile. It is nice to have a tool do one neat thing in a game. It is better when they can do much more than just one thing. That's one side of the answer to this question. There is another. It is to take what has already been done in games before but having them used differently in your game. For example a past game used a hammer in one way, your game will have one too, but it will be used differently.  

6. "What are some nice touches I can add to (   )?" This is just polishing up a game or making any given thing just a little better. To make a graphical quality a little better, to make the story a little better, to make gameplay a little better, or whatever else.  

7. "What are different ways this thing can be in my game?" This is to stretch things out. It is to broaden things. It is to consider all the different ways that things can manifest in the game you are making. It is to decide just what would do what. It is to consider what utility the things will have in your game.  

8. "How can any given thing be made into something special?"  

9. "What is a common problem in games that I can fix?" Back when RPG games were in their infancy they had the problem of having many enemies on screen yet not lively so because that would take up limited game space they were working with. So they came up with random battles. It would have little animation between enemies. As a result they could produce battles without the cost of so much space. Random battles had problems of their own however. Since then many of the flaws of that system have been worked on. Now that games can be robust with space they could fix them. Just remember that just because it is a broken thing in a game that doesn't mean it can't be fixed. You might want a certain thing in the game that is considered broken but you can nicely include it if you can work out its problems and put it into workable form.  

10. "It is good in theory but it is good in reality?" Sometimes reality itself isn't good- like the too lifelike aspects of gameplay. Nobody wants to regularly polish their sword in between battles or have to mandatorily sleep (like in Betrayal at Krondor.) Sometimes game makers are too smart for their own good. They create highly complicated systems. They produce a very complicated game as a result. Too much so. It may be that they are trying to innovate things. They just want to do something differently. However some ideas have stood the test of time and they shouldn't be ignored. Some games are too ambitious. They really want something revolutionary but just have too much on their plate. They are too stubborn to realize this and in the end will have produced a game that couldn't reach where they wanted it to.  

## Important things to include in different genres  

### Adventure Games  

Exploring the world is key, therefore wanting to explore the world is the feeling you want to give the player. There should be a good amount of different resources. Those always work well. Whether it is slicing grass or mining gems there are lots to get from the world around. To everything a mystery and no one area taken for granted. You may find one place a dead end until you return there with the right item. If a net is found or a bottle, a shovel or a flute, they all have many uses and are helpful in many ways. You may want to go a less Zelda route on this. Just use your imagination to come up with items that were not in the game, except maybe those that are just easily thought of anyway like the bow and arrow. Look around your house or look at what's on TV for some ideas. Consider how those can be translated into a game. If you do want to draw the more obscure in your game too then just find a different use for it, to retain uniqueness. For example, bombs are almost always in the game, but your bombs are color bombs that spread out different effects. Yellow bombs blow up a yellow door, things like that. Or place a bomb underneath a platform to burst upward.  
* **Puzzle elements in an Adventure game**
The most common element is simply having to know what item to use and where. For example, there are enemies in the room. You have to kill them all to open the door, only they can only be killed with a certain weapon. Or there is a curtain in a room that you slash with your sword to go forward. Or to use your fire wand a certain way. To require a certain way to interact with objects is also very common, like needing to pull on a statue's tongue. Sometimes one item leads to another that leads to another and another.  
* **As for the least difficulty** : They can be as simple as putting a heavy statue on top of a switch or much more complicated. There can be a crack on the floor to bomb or a thing to hit with an arrow. Could be just a switch under a thing you move. A treasure in the dungeon lets you proceed. A treasure you've gotten elsewhere, same thing. If you kill all the enemies in a room and the door opens. Having you move cubes just the right way so you can get through. There are right order things such as hitting something in the right order. If you are transformed you can proceed.. For example a tile changes you into someone else and that someone/something else allows you to go through a certain door.
* **As for medium difficulty** : Raising water levels to access new areas elsewhere. Unexpected use of an item such as dashing into something to make a thing fall or using a book at a slab you come upon. Falling into an inconspicuous hole. Switches lower different barriers. You may have to go all the way to the start of the dungeon to hit the right switch. It may seem like you need to hit a switch to go past a hole but there is just enough room to pass by. If you did hit that switch it would block you in a future room. Falling down the right hole by guessing. Similarly, with transporting tiles. You have to kill all of the enemies to open a door, only the area is dark and it is difficult to find them all. You have to kill an enemy in a room to open the next area up but they don't immediately appear in the room.
* **As for harder difficulties** : Having to know just what way to pass without any hints. Such as there being five small waterfalls that don't seem to go nowhere but by trying to go through one (and only one of them) you do. Having to use two different items on one thing to get through, with not much of a guess as to what those are. A lot of guessing within a corridor that is highly confusing. Requiring techniques that the player would never consider, like bombing yourself across a hole or if you enter the same room ten times then it will change. Having to do patterns you'd never expect like a circle eight around two boulders before you can bomb it away or holding the down button in a place for ten seconds will open the way. Only a certain item will let you go further in the game but that item is both hard to find and nothing is known of its use.  


### Sports Games  

When John Madden was asked about his new football game he told the creators of it "there's not enough players on the field," or something to that effect. Sports games have always been popular among gamers even if they end up as shovelware. Pong itself was just tennis/ ping pong. There are a large number of sports that a video game can be made from. Here are the more common ones: baseball, football, soccer, tennis, boxing, wrestling, golf, racing, volleyball, and bowling. Then the less common: fishing, pool, hunting, The most important thing to work on is the mechanics. You obviously don't have a golf club in your hand. You have a gamepad. Unless we are talking about future VR or something it is far from a realistic simulation. Nevertheless the same ideas are kept intact and enjoyable as games, if the mechanics provide a type of style. Considering a golf game there are differing clubs, indication of wind, terrain, stronger and weaker strikes, things like those. A baseball game may require an eye as quick as in real life. Football games include plays and maneuvering. Soccer games translate very well into video games. Some do more than others. Pool games require the right angles. A racing game requires that you slow down when you turn. My advice is to develop the mechanics of them the best that you can.  
They rely heavily on game mechanics. Real life sports aren't possible on a flat screen TV. So what comes into play are things like terrain in a golf game and understanding that. Understanding things like wind in that game. Having a meter to strike at just the right time. In translating a sports game into a video game things like that must be designed. Some are more simple than others, like bowling. Some are more natural than others like tennis.  

### RPG games  

Some of the best things about RPGs you'd think would have always been. Some of them were just due to space constraints however. The ability to take so many things to make what you want of them is among them. It is nice when you can easily find the shop and the inn when you enter town. Treasure chests and breakable pots are scattered about. A large part of the formula has remained the same. They've added ability makers such as getting ability points along with HP and MP. They may give you a direction to where you want to improve. Ability points can be spent towards swords, magic, or stat boosts, your choice. I'm all for a stunning beginning. Apparently some agree when you regard the opening of Final Fantasy games, like the Red Wings of Final Fantasy 4 or the ominous opening of Final Fantasy 6. There is a lot of magic lost when an RPG becomes an action RPG, no longer using turn based battles. Some want a return to fantasy based RPG games instead of a sci-fi setting.  
Summon monsters are an important element. Blue mage abilities are good too where you can call on an enemy you defeated. A recent game I was playing gave you a 30% chance of capturing any monster you defeated (if it was that blue mage party member that did.) As a result you collect something just about every battle instead of just money and stat boosts. Which reminds me- the thief job class could be better in just about every RPG I've ever played. 9 out of 10 times you are told "couldn't steal anything." Back to summons though, I like how Final Fantasy 6 lets you learn magic just by equipping them. Final Fantasy 8 was a lot more elaborate with that adding to it special abilities. Like one stopped all random battles. Some summon monsters are enormous. So many are based off of old mythological beings ranging from grecian lore to Christian demons. That is, every last one you can think of except Lucifer (what a shame!) If a great myth is already there, then why not use it?  
The stories involve love and loss, destiny and hope, overcoming and defeating a great evil in the world. Along the way characters die, even sacrifice themselves to save the rest of the party. Friends betray or may have never been friends at all. Mind control through magic is happening. The main enemy turns out to be your sibling. The four crystals must be saved. That greatest weapon or spell must be found. The characters are fighting against an evil dictator. They are often on the run. Magic has returned to the land. A great soldier has defected to join your party. The world is dying because of a corporation misusing it Gaia-Theory style. A King has waged war against your kingdom and you flee to fight another day. You wake up one day into the game world and all of your friends and family send you out into a coming of age mini adventure. Monsters have mysteriously returned to the land. The main character is against the King on a moral basis and is questioning his own morals himself.  
The most important elements in making an RPG are: story, enjoyment of items, graphical quality, exploration, magic/weapons/armor, stat boosting elements, learning abilities, quality of characters complete with appealing personalities, and arousing emotion from the player. With these you can't go wrong.  
  
### Beat em Ups  

It is good to have weapons you can pick up along the way. There are different settings to pick from, from fantasy stuff to the tough crime filled streets, or back and forth in time like in "Turtles in Time." There's that much needed powerup here and there. Throwing a trash can, picking up a knife. There are things you can ride on along the way, beast or vehicle. I was once playing one with a friend who actually got angry that most of the enemies were only color swaps. There are effects to add to the game like being able to throw the enemy toward the screen. Attack a certain enemy and he drops goodies. Do it quick, they are quick to flee. In two player beat em ups the better player at the end of the level is told so. In some beat 'em ups the player has magic. They may have a special attack but it drains their life energy if they use it. The players are sometimes proportioned in the usual formula- one is slow but strong, another is weak but fast. There may be those to rescue along the way. With these a great beat 'em up can be made.  

### Metroidvanias  

Dark settings do well, like those gothic or ominous. As a mysterious planet, hell, or a demon infested castle. Maps are very important even if they are opened up a little at a time. The main idea is that the more you get the more places you can go. For example getting a super jump item or power can take you to the next area. Those are important to go over: getting a grappling hook, shooting down a door with a more powerful gun, being able to go into deep water, being able to survive lava, being able to climb up a wall, becoming smaller to fit into tighter areas, flying abilities, jump stepping, freezing enemies to turn them into platforms, using a super bomb, presenting an item to a thing and so let forth, being given transportation as from a flying horse carriage and its driver, and sticking onto platforms to go all around them.  
A favorite element for players is being able to take the power of those you defeat. Usually after defeating about 10 of the same thing you get its power. That power is based on what that enemy could do. Sometimes it is the power to conjure them for help like a fairy that flies around you constantly and attacks your foes for you.  
And another good element to include is that you can gather materials to make things. There may be a person in the game you can go to in order to have them make things from what you have collected. Such as a sword with iron or more complicated things. These games often include the truly monstrous as enemy bosses from Super Metroid to so many Castlevania games. Just do the same and provide the player with a pattern to work with and you'll do well.  
  
### Platformers/Side Scrollers  

There are the run in gun kind, there are the fantasy world kind, certainly there are too many to name. I don't know where to start. Most often you have to hit something to grab a power from it. That power can be about anything you want it to be. Fire balls have been used, so have bouncy balls. Ninja stars for the ninja, a whip for the vampire hunter. Or Rygar where you had a saw disk on a whip. A whip is the only thing I know to call it, anyway. Some think we had fireballs before, why not include ice balls in this one? Or enemies in the old game had this weapon, so why not give that to the main character. With that the game evolves well. Once they were throwing hammers at you and now you are throwing hammers at them. The weapons themselves can be enhanced like a longer whip than before or a fire whip, a chain whip, etc. And then there is a game that has nothing to do with anything I have been talking about, like Mega Man. No other game land is quite like mega man's. He takes the power from his enemy boss and the game acts like a paper, rock, scissor sort of way. Taking the power of your enemies- that never gets old.  
Fortunately the story doesn't have to be more than vague. The princess needs to be saved. Your girlfriend needs to be saved. There you go.  
I love the magical feeling of Mario falling from the sky with a wand in hand. I love the awesome moments in Ninja Gaiden's cutscenes. I loved entering into the ghost houses of Super Mario World. I like the appearance of Bowser, the clown car and the thunder, at the end of it. Little touches can do so much.  
The terrain shifting in Ghouls and Ghosts was neat. Finding a pipe you can go down in Mario Bros is cool. Having the same enemy only in different forms is nice. For example one that has wings instead. They don't even know how to fly, they just hover a little. Maybe the player even feels a little superior because of it. It is common that you have or are something that protects you but if you lose it you may only be able to take one more hit. Like from big to small, armored to in your unmentionables.  
The game maker is free to employ their imagination. Nothing has to make any sense. In fact the less sense you make the better. Games aren't meant to be as boring and plain as real life. They are an escape into a fun or at least engaging world. Some are just trying to make a new mushroom kingdom but they will fail every time. Besides, what's the fun in making a new one of someone else's? I've yet to see a whole new game world as well hammered out as that. At least inside scrolling games.  
These are the important things to focus on when making a platformer: game mechanics, especially jumping. It isn't too difficult or unreasonable with jumping mechanics. There are many different ways a character can jump in the game from flipping to more heavy feeling jumps. A good idea with it is a good idea indeed. Will they climb the wall, flip from wall to wall, or neither? Are you thrust backward when hit, or no? Does your weapon feel precice? Powerups are another imported thing and are something that should be carefully thought out. The designs of enemies, how they look, and what they do, is important. A touch of exploration put in such as upper and lower areas, bonus rooms, and hidden rooms being present. You may want to include things you can ride on if it fits your game, be it a beast or a skateboard. A good world map is a great thing to include while going from level to level. Hidden levels are good to have, like having more than one exit sometimes. To have a variety of levels is good too. Some have you swimming, another is a forest area, whatever you like. Spending money is a good addition. Collecting a certain amount of things gives you something special. Adding the fun of a mini game is a good inclusion too such as the memory based card game in Super Mario Bros. 3.  
Jump mechanics are an important consideration. You can add things to it like wall jumping, wall climbing, stomping downward from a jump, and double jumping. Sometimes the jump is stiff. Some are determined while others can change mid air. These can add a lot of difficulty to the game. I would suggest that if jumping itself makes the game more difficult then why not have a powerup or something to change that problem? Without movement being animated the movement looks ugly. Some animations have the character swinging their arms in a way. Some can be very lifelike. Others can be more stiff. Movement should be there however.  
And by following these you can do no wrong in making a great game.  

### First/Third Person Shooters  

The formula isn't very difficult but the formula is important. A variety of weapons to use, those having different functions, is important. You know, here's a chainsaw, here's a machine gun. Here's a list of some options: guns of different models, a missile launcher, a golden gun, a grenade, a knife, a machete, a laser, a blow dart, a crossbow, a bow and arrow, a mace, throwing star, a spear, a mine, something remotely controlled, a cannon, a sword, katana, dagger, a club, bat, pole, or anything to pick up and throw. Just by including as many as you can you will have made a highly expansive game. The question is: where will you place them? What a large amount of uses to give them? How will you balance them out? How will they make the game more fun?  
To go over the environment next, and setting: That itself can make up a list. That list is: zombie apocalypse, future world (something like Blade Runner maybe, Star Trek perhaps, or your favorite creatively invented sci fi universe.) Could be a dystopia, could be either based on a fake war or one real, you could either be a cop or a criminal in an invented city or wherever else, you could be a secret agent on a mission, it could be a medieval like fantasy world, could be set in hell, an alien world, time travel, or a multi dimensional world with any of these included.  
What will be the gameplay itself depends mostly on the setting. Some are very straightforward, others not. Here is a useful list of purposes the player may have: infiltrating a unit, sneaking your way in, assasination, sabotage, destroying a base or destroying ill intended weaponry, going after evil alien creatures, serving a crime boss, acting as a soldier, surviving a zombie infested land, delivering a special item to an important person, saving innocent people, fighting against an alien takeover, going after wanted people, or on a secret mission.  
The gameplay can also include these things: sneaking up on your quarry, getting by without being caught, hiding behind cover, finding different ways in, gaining a pass code or ID key, having allies beside you, having puzzles to solve, maning vehicles sometimes, being the last one alive, freeing hostages or prisoners, stealing a powerful space ship, destroying the alien monsters in it before you can, exploring areas- abandoned homes in a land of zombies, buildings, war areas, demon infested areas, or the enemies stockpile of weapons, you can take any weapons from those taken down, going through corridors, spying on your enemies, and so on.  
With these things brought together well you are sure to have a great FPS game.  

### Open world games  

Give to the player many different ways of doing just one thing, such as getting around and the uses of things he finds in any given place. Let their way be more fun, like on motorcycles or climbing walls. Have there be much to collect with much to gain. Let none of the world be in vain but in all places something to be found or used. Have them lost in that world with fascination.  
Things help for sure and the player desires these: faster transportation, a map marker telling you where to go and where things are, it not being too much of a fetch quest, reasons for exploration, auto saving and convenient saving, things not impossible but reasonable, quests/missions that feel pointless, and avoiding anything that is boring. Some thrust you right into mystery such as "Myst." Awesome title for that by the way. Grand Theft Auto sure put a new spin on racing games. See this car? Take it. The police chase you, that's our racing game. Maybe a lot can be learned from that in mixing genres.  
Some games let you go into an arcade room within the game so you can play a lot of old simple but fun games. There is that old trope where you have to sneak past the guard.  
Some open world games are only semi open world games. There may even be just a narrow passage from place to place. Another bad thing is when the player just isn't getting what they want from the game world. There may be a common element of things to get that are just too scattered and difficult to find so the player has to go thoroughly through every little thing. Online games bring human life into it and the effect is far better than any computer characters in it. Those online players can help each other out.  
  1. For a list of things within the adventure based game world: grassy plains, snow capped mountains, desert, swamp, forest, cavern, lake, river, sea, island, fiery area, towns, beasts, monsters, angels, demons, spirits, ghosts, creatures, weapons, armor, food, fruit, trees of all kinds, towers, walls, animals, great kingdom, water fall, pits, different races of beings, shelter, sacred areas, graves, churches, hideout, merchants, transportation, sword in stone, dungeon, labyrinth, enormous beasts, and and your own home. Does your open world adventure game have them?
  2. For a list of things within the sci fi based open world game: Sci Fi transportation large and small, with greater or lesser power/capabilities. Alien races, some good, others not, instead of a fabled sword a fabled ship, instead of metals shields electronic shields, instead of job classes race classes, a formidable enemy approaches from deep space, forbidden "human enhancement" technology, androids, animal like vehicles such as the AT AT from Star Wars, and evil space dictator, getting a pass code illegally, lush new worlds like you've never seen before. Does your open world sci fi game have them?
  3. For a list of things within the war based open world game: based on a real war or an imaginary one. Based on a simulation or more realistic representation of a past war. Set out on a mission maybe like James Bond. Having you go through a jungle, buildings, ships, car chases or escapes, or covertly searching through the streets. Meeting someone privately to receive your objective. Gaining rank, support, and power. Has a helicopter. Has explosions. Just the right weapon for the circumstance. As an assassin, a soldier, secret agent, or hired hand. Contains rules such as if you shoot a hostage, game over. Being sneaky, areas that block bullets, and lets you drive military vehicles like a tank. Does your war game have them?
  4. For a list of things within an MMORPG open world game: Different races to choose from, legendary beasts to fight, right of passage, more social areas, lore and legends, quests, objectives, selling, buying, trading, human characters building upon the world, game has a schedule and holidays, area of mini games, tournament fighting, human customization of the world, wanted posters for monsters or even human characters, leveling up upgrades your appearance, suits and outfits as chosen/purchased by the player, renting things from other players, and resources everywhere to harvest. Those are good things to put into an MMORPG.  

### Racing games  

There are a wide variety of them for sure. There are a lot of possibilities from futuristic racing to kart racing and a lot more. Some are super sprite scallers. Others are overhead. Some are first person perspectives. Others are side scrollers such as Excite Bike. Racing games have always been most lending to game peripherals. Those of a steering wheel for example. Some have you traveling across the nations of the world which is nice. Players like buying new equipment for their car based on the money they got from a good race. Be it better tires, nitro boosts, new paint, etc. Pick your vehicle (or driver) the fast but hard to control vehicle, the slow but sturdy one, or wherever in between. The track itself may restore your energy so you can be bumped around more. Or on the track there are speed boosts. There are shortcuts to find. There are things to avoid like oil slicks.  

### Fighting games  

A little game called Street Fighter 2 came out one year and the whole world was pumping in quarters like never before. Why was it such a good game? For one the fighting animation made you feel like a martial artist yourself. You could throw and grapple and each player had their own style of fighting from Chun Li's flipping kicks to Zangief's bear-like maneuvering. Every character had their own unique characteristics otherwise, too. Vega had claws, Blanka the green beast, you had a sumo wrestler, and a boxer too. Dhalsim's limbs could stretch out. The music in the game was great too. When Mortal Kombat was made it just added fuel to the whole genre, enough for so many more of them to be created. Even the Ninja Turtles got their own rendition. Mortal Kombat pulled off something evil in an appealing way. It was a fight to take seriously. It was to be less a martial artist and more a combatant. Hearing Scorpions ``get over here!" was good enough reason alone to play the game but when you combine it with the setting and all else it is a masterpiece. Killer instinct decided to focus on combos. I guess you have to have some gimmick you are good at! Super Smash Brothers allowed for many players at once. In that game the players are trying to throw the others out and the last one standing wins.  
Creating balanced characters is important. That is making every character equally capable to win.  
Dragon Ball Z had a great series of fighting games if you want a more obscure source of inspiration. Sometimes famed characters make their way into fighting games such as from Marvel, DC, or famous villains from horror movies. An often overlooked thing in making characters for fighting games is that those fighters should be relatable with personalities. They should be at least mostly humanoid. Fighting as a skeleton with a sword may appear cool at face value but that skeleton doesn't have a personality. The most successful fighting games had mostly human characters. It's funny. Game makers have often thought the opposite of that was true. They went after gimmicks. Gimmicks like fighting as dinosaurs, prehistoric beasts, and things of mythology. Mortal Kombat, Street Fighter 2, Fatal Fury, and other more successful fighting games had more human-like characters with simple but understandable personalities.  

### Mixing Genres  

Here are some games that are brought to mind: Blaster Master combined footing with a tank like vehicle. Contra combined side scrolling with overhead game play. Act Raiser combined a god game with a side scrolling game. Chrono Trigger had a momentary racing game in it. Currently, game genres are blending together. Why not have a little of everything? That open world game where you can visit a casino. That place where you can fish or hunt. Choice to go from 3D to 2D. Giving RPG qualities to FPS games.  

## The Best Ways to Place Secrets in any Game  

1. Would seem suicidal such as jumping into a pit. They normally kill you but this one doesn't. It leads to a special item.  
2. Going a dangerous route leads to something special.  
3. Going out of the way to a place that seems to go nowhere, but there is treasure there.  
4. Jumping in certain areas seems pointless but an invisible block is there with a 1 up.  
5. A crack means it can be bombed.  
6. It is there but you can't have it. By returning to it with greater power you can take it.  
7. Strike the wall with your whip and there appears a hidden area.  
8. Many pipes but only a few lead downward.  
9. Button combo codes.  
10. Low chance of stealing an incredible item from an enemy.  
11. Is in a place you wouldn't think to look.  
12. Is in a place you didn't think you could go.  
13. Requires special conditions to make happen. Is only there at night. Only appears if you have been somewhere a while such as Doom Gaze in Final Fantasy 6. Like bringing forth Reptile in Mortal Kombat. Like having a certain amount of coins and time on the clock gives you fireworks at the end of a Super Mario Bros level.  
14. Is found after a puzzle is figured out.  
15. Is something to dig for or fish for.  
16. Is found after you burn down a bush or lift a heavy boulder.  
17. can only be gotten with a power up.  
18. If you hold down on a certain thing or in a certain place then a new area is revealed.  
19. Is a rare occurrence such as an item coming up at an auction house.  
20. Comes after getting all of the coins in a level.  
21. Treasure chests, pots, grass, book cases, cabinets, barrels.  
22. They are unlocked after beating the game.  
23. Might only be possible with only one character. Like Cyan laying in the bed of his old room in Final Fantasy 6.  
24. Finally being able to travel through lava, jump super high, fly, or travel through the sea.  
25. Gotten with a key, a special passcode, or ID.  

## About Easter Eggs
  
Just like an Easter egg they are something to find. Once found could be amusing. It might be a painting of a character from a whole different series. It could be the developer's name or image in a secret room. It could be a throwback to a different game. It might be a moment when the character acts like they would in a different series. There is the Chris Houlihan room in The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past. He won that room in a contest. Inside it his name is referenced and a lot of rupees are given to the player. The famed Koonami code may be an Easter Egg in a non Konami game ( up up down down left right left right B A.) It might be a room or thing showing off the upcoming sequel. It could be an airship at the bottom of a sea which was in a different game and different world. Sometimes Easter Eggs are in the hardware itself such as a soundtrack on the disk. They could be characters used in your game from another popular series, as a movie or something, such as Bigs and Wedge in Final Fantasy. Sometimes old movies are quoted and that's the Easter Egg. They could be a word you unscramble resulting in a message from the game's creators. In Fallout: New Vegas you find a refrigerator with a corpse inside that looks just like Indiana Jones. That is an Easter Egg that refers to the movie Indiana Jones and The Kingdom of the Crystal Skull. In the movie Indiania Jones hurried into a refrigerator in the midst of a nuclear explosion. Which he survived and was a scene that many fans of the series had since made fun of. An Easter Egg would be like playing a music album in reverse. Like the Konami code it is just something that is expected sometimes.  
  
## The Best Things...  

1. The best guns... can be charged for greater power, hone on enemies, hit all targets on stage, fire three bullets at once, do the job the first time, wavy is cool, so is freezing your enemy.  
2. The best magic... is the ultimate spell. Is the most difficult to get, turns the table in an instant, was a fable proven true, has the nicest graphics associated with it.  
3. The best sword... is like The Sword in the Stone, found in a fabled land, was made even better after being tempered, cost the most, can be charged to greater power, can cast powerful spells. Is not just the best but the best by a longshot.  
4. The best boss... Has gained a special and formidable power, casts the most awesome magic, is a thing that makes you want revenge, was the one behind who you thought was the final boss, and is super challenging.  
5. The best special item (e.g., the dark world mirror, the shovel) opens up a whole new way of playing the game or adds a lot of resources in it, makes life easier for all of the players, brings fun into the game, is neat like the hookshot, and gives you superpowers.  
6. The best environment... Goes from day to night, has an eclipse night too sometimes, is on the moon, shifts while you cross it, has weather to it, lots to explore and find there, is as mysterious as the sea.  
7. The best racing game... gives you good control over the vehicle, is a great two player game, lets you upgrade your vehicle, lets you drive crazy fast, has nice graphics all around.  
8. The best RPG... doesn't make you level up either too much or too little, has an excellent story, is robust with items- each unique, doing special things, grabs your attention, is never boring, is straight forward, and has great characters in them,  
9. The best beat em up... GIves you things to throw, Gives you things to ride. Is great as a two player game, provides good maneuvering, and has a wide variety of enemies.  
10. The best side scrolling game... has lots of hidden things to find, has an overworld map from level to level, the power ups are a lot of fun, memorizing patterns will get you further, and the player is able to control the character the way they want to.  
11. The best metroidvania games... lets you take your enemies power, makes life easier by giving you a map, has awesome monsters, lets you collect things from which to form new things, and has a dark setting to it.  
12. The best fishing games... let you upgrade your gear. Gives you a large lake or a number of them, gives you sight within the waters, and provides just the right tricks to nab the fish.  
13. The best FPS... lets you sneak around. Gives you powerful weapons. Gives you more than just guns. Has good hiding places. Sets you out on missions.  
14. The best job classes in an RPG... let you steal things as a thief, let you summon monsters as a summoner, Could never be without the Black Mage or the White Mage. Has the warrior or Knight for those who prefer using weapons.  
15. The best sci fi games... Have incredible ships. Has aliens with unique personalities. Have a very evil and powerful race to conquer. Having you explore the universe. Has awesome science fiction tech.  
16. The best music... Is rememberable. Fits the mood. Isn't over-simple. Isn't clitter clatter. Is well thought out. Comes only from the best composers.  
17. The most acceptable games... Don't make things impossible. Don't have funky mechanics. Don't have mechanics difficult to use right. Its music doesn't annoy you. Doesn't feel pointless, allows you to do a variety of things level to level. Is a thing you love to explore and is fun or intense to play.  
18. The best mechanics... let you jump as you intended. Lets you climb walls. Doesn't have weapons that are difficult to hit a target with. Lets you run either fast or slow. Provides attacks that ease difficulty, if you can find them.  
19. The best hidden secrets... was what the player was looking for. Brings up things not found anywhere else in the game. Are worth having/ uncovering. Are consistent and predictable: such as if you get every coin in any given level then something special happens.  
20. The best in-game help: is straight forward. Doesn't have to be difficult to begin with. Is useful, not annoying and useless like Navi. Is laid out in the first level or soon thereafter. Comes from money in the game like paid advice. Lets you practice a thing before expecting you to know it.  
  
## The History of Some Major Games, Why They Succeeded, And How They Evolved  

* **Mario Games** : Mario is the Mickey Mouse of the video game world. There is always at least a little appreciation expected for him. Nintendo was a little in the market by the time of Donkey Kong. Donkey Kong did well and the original single screen Mario Bros also. Nintendo then knew the next direction of their company should be in game making. In fact Donkey Kong received a lot of highlights in the home console market. Better technology brought single screen games into games of levels. The genius of Mario's creator, Shigero Miyamoto, was the least of what he was capable of. If you add the music of Koji Kondo you just can't lose. It was a strange world and if cartoons are any example, kids love strange worlds. A world of turtles, of Bowser and mushroom land, which not at all made since, but was such fun to play. It had so many secrets. The player didn't even know what would come out of any given brick at first. Hidden blocks, pipes to go down, the player didn't know what would come next. One brick brings up a vine to climb up into a cloud area. If you jump onto a turtle going down a staircase just the right way you can get 1 up after 1 up. The coins you get, if you get a hundred you get an extra life. Game players didn't know these things until they played the game. It was before the internet. Then after the first level they didn't continue forward into the same area but were sent below. I remember when I first played it that it was so cool you could run across the top of the screen if you could get up there. Similarly there were water and castle levels. Any given level could provide something different like a Lakitu throwing down spiked turtles. With each new level there could be a different thing, like a Bullet Bill. You could jump on those almost like a platform. Who doesn't think a mushroom isn't cool? Or what kid doesn't like turtles? You could have a statue of a face that blows bubbles and kids would love it.  
Mario Bros 3 : It was mario times mario times mario. The same things were there only graphically the better. Nice things were added to pre-existing things such as wings for the Goomba. No more just hammer bros but boomerang bros, too.Most importantly Mario could now fly. He can pick up a shell and toss it. He had a score of other suits. There was the hammer bros suit, the tanooki suit, and the frog suit. For the first time Mario had a world map from level to level. It contained choices- sometimes you can play one level instead of another to get through. Some had mini games. Other's had treasure houses. Mario was truly going up into the clouds now, onto enemy boss ships. Each ship had a unique enemy boss, one of Bowser's kids. The worlds were each diverse, from the desert to the ice world. Gamers particularly liked the giant world where every enemy was gigantic. As for secrets there are so very many in the game. They range from getting every coin in a level to holding the down button to enter into the background, where a chest with a flute is found. The flute was the warping item of the game.  
Mario Bros 3 received a great deal of attention during its release. It did before that too with the movie Wizards. It was a highly markable game. There was a lot to pull from in making toys. Mcdonald's sponsored it with toys. It got its own cartoon. There were good reasons for magazines to include it. It lived up well to expectations. It far exceeded expectations. Nintendo could have made a little better Mario game but they came out with something far better than its predecessors.  

* **Zelda** : My first knowledge of the game came from a magazine providing secrets for it. It had gained a lot of traction in magazines because of the sheer amount of secrets in the game. As a result of the secrets in it a large number of gamers were asking magazines about it. What they were talking about in that magazine fascinated me. A secret sword? Lost woods? So as soon as I could I got it and played it. It was the first cart game that had a save battery in it. Its title screen was one of the greatest. The music for it was at first going to be Ravel's Bolero but it turned out to be copyrighted, so Koji Kondo developed his beloved Zelda theme instead. The title screen then scrolls down to every item you can get in the game, as well as the basic plot. That way the player was sure if they had gotten every item or not. They may be left wondering what one of them does, such as the red ring. Then upon starting the game there is a cave. Going into it a sage tells you to take a sword before you venture out. When things fall into place it always seems to have been accidental. Ideas suddenly come out of the blue. Shigeru Miyamaoto modeled the game after his childhood explorations into the countryside, such as entering into a cave. It was the first game of its kind for sure. The dungeon music in the first Zelda game was captivating. Certain areas had especially neat things, such as the grave yard. There was a diverse amount of enemies with different things to do to them. Particularly difficult was the Darknut which you had to strike from behind, yet the way they move about makes that difficult. The enemy design overall was very nice. Mothula comes to mind. Overall the graphical quality of the game was well done. The enemies were diverse in many ways. The music was excellent. The exploration aspect had the gamers looking into every corner of the game and often enough found something.  
Zelda 2 decided to do something entirely different. I remember getting that box at a rental store with an awesome sword on it, taking it home, and being both confused and disappointed. I felt the same way about Super Mario Bros 2 but this was going too far. I am sure their intentions were good. They probably thought they had a great idea. After all, people loved side-scrolling games. When I did see the overhead part of the game I felt it was awful looking. Everything had shrunk. I hadn't really any desire to be in these places, like the towns, and it was far easier to get lost or not know what to do in that one.  
Zelda 3: A Link to the Past was based on the original formula. The hardware leap from the NES to the SNES was very pronounced. Everything looked much better and sounded much better. Back then graphical leaps seemed larger. Starting with the title screen it had a kind of 3D effect using the triforce. Then a much more elaborate "Zelda" icon was seen, having a sword and a shield with it. After that the story of the game was shown. That's pulled off very well. Upon starting the game Link awakens in his bed during a storm. The rain is falling outside. Zelda is calling out to Link. His uncle says he has to go. So he does. Link gets a little treasure and can do no more than venture outside. Eventually he comes to a secret entrance into the castle. He finds his uncle there who has fallen and gets his uncle's sword to seek out Zelda, who is locked up in the dungeon of the castle. After freeing her they make their ways through the sewer into the temple. It is the best game opening of all time. That is everything a game opening should be.  
No doubt A Link to the Past was a landmark game. It remains on people's top ten list to this day, decades later. Nintendo did what they always do well, which is to take old ideas and improve upon them. There is imagination to it. Every area you explore is its own thing. Maybe most importantly there is magic to it, from the lost woods in a quest for the master sword to the flute (ocarina) player on the tree stump. The mechanics of the game work well. Each weapon does what it is supposed to and is very fun to use sometimes, depending on what you are doing. Nintendo made an array of diverse enemies again. Like that thing that shocks you when you strike it, the skeletons that hop backward when you try to hit them, or the bastard from the sea that you can't quite hit but it can sure hit you! Nintendo set forth a lot of things to collect such as rupees, bottles, and heart pieces, not to mention arrow and bomb upgrades and the major weapons of the dungeons. Again, each setting was very nice, such as going through Death Mountain or changing everything altogether through the venture into the Dark World. Those are the reasons why Zelda is such a great game.  

* **Final Fantasy** : the history, evolution, and qualities of the game- Final Fantasy may never have been. It was the last hope of a dying company. When they had but one game to make before they were probably going to have to close shop they released Final Fantasy. First I want to mention Nubou Uematsu. His music has been a shining star above the series. The first final fantasy game could be considered a little better than its more popular contemporary Dragon Quest. The box for the game was impressive. It probably boosted its popularity in fact. Even the font on that was good to look at. Final Fantasy was going to be their final game and oh what the world would have missed out on if it was! It went from a little better than its competitors to greatly better, a game that any RPG player couldn't do without. A reason alone that made the genre popular. WIth the exception of a few sequels they are largely different games. They have cross over elements in them, however, and fans of the series can't wait to see the new use of the Chocobo or what role Cid will play. With Final Fantasy 4 there were a few things that really sold it: the music, the story, and the gameplay. If any of these were taken out then the game wouldn't have been as good as it was, for sure. But what a great story it was involving love, betrayal, and a hope to make things better. You are casually sailing through the sea when Leviathan appears. The enemy bosses were fascinating, such as the Four Fiends. The game was sometimes quirky but not in a way that made you cringe. It was a big thing back then that you go to the moon in a game, which you did here. When I heard my friends appraise this game, it was most often mentioned. The gameplay was good. Nothing out of the ordinary- turn based battles as typical. What amped that up was the enemy quality in the game and the music beside it. There were certain ways of defeating different bosses. Some took away your ability to use metallic gear. Another must not be hit while in his shell. Overall Final Fantasy 4 had a great story to it, which was its greatest quality. That includes the way the enemies were made and presented, includes the quests such as healing Rosa and Cecil becoming a Paladin, some sad moments such as Porom and Poloms sacrifice to save the party, Tellah's revenge, and the story was good throughout.  
Final Fantasy 6 was certainly a more complicated game. If you are looking for a good example for a game intro, it is a great game to consider. We are presented with a straightforward story. Magic has returned to the land after technology has taken over it. Then a first as far as I know: the intro leads into the start of the game. In other words after watching the title screen story you are brought into the game. There are three people entering into a town trying to find an esper- a being of magic that can impart magic on regular people. The town doesn't like the empire. The three fight their way into the area the esper was suspected to be, and there it is. The esper kills two of them- zapping them out of existence. One is left, who is Terra, a main character in the game. She is aided by someone in that town. He removes a slave crown from her head which had enslaved her. She has lost her memory by that point and is struggling with what she should do. Should she help the rebels? The rebels want her help because of her magical power. Magic was just now coming back into the world. The first part of the game is incredible already and even gets better. The makers of Final Fantasy are pros when it comes to making a good story.  
Another appealing thing about the game is the large number of characters. Not only that but each has a distinct personality, purpose, and abilities. In fact while they were flushing out the story they assigned certain people to certain characters. They developed the story for each and interconnected them later, a very smart approach at story making. The game wasn't at all a typical turn based battle. Each character had their own ability to use which usually was. Gau for example who could take a monster's power. With button codes like from Street Fighter 2 Sabin could do special martial arts like attacks. Edward had technology on his side. For example a chainsaw, a powerful attack weapon that can be found for him. At first only Terra could use magic. Later you get esper stones that summon beings, improve stats, and teach you magic by gaining ability points. Relics were a nice addition to the game. They improved certain stats and had effects such as letting you walk much faster or guarding a character low on HP. Could make you immune to certain things, double experience points, or stop all random battles. Those were sometimes purchased, sometimes found, and other times obtained from bosses.  
They included special places in the game such as a battle arena and an auction house. If you are lucky then they will bring an esper up for auction. In the battle arena you could bet on an item to win. If you put up a very good item then you can win a very good other item. Kefka's tower was also a neat place. It was a tower where only magic could be used and if you reach the top you get a powerful item- X Magic. In good games every area is contained as its own unique and special thing. Towns are hardly the same, some are bustling market areas, others are for the upper class, while some are villages of magicians. Any given thing in a Final Fantasy game has been well thought out. It's no wonder why it is such a great series.  
To briefly mention Final Fantasy games that followed: Final Fantasy 7 brought a cartoon into a movie. Now things were in 3D. Not perfect 3D, although the recent remake led to its improvement. Back then though it was stunning. Going into 3D at that time was like going from crawling to walking. Walking at first, and now we are running. Final Fantasy 7 was helped by a Pepsi sponsor as well. It brought a lot of success to Nintendo's new competitor, the Play Station. Fate would have it that Square needed a disk based system. Each game continued being unique but the quality of each has been maintained, by its best attributes: story, gameplay, depth, and the music.  

* **Fighting games Street Fighter and Mortal Kombat** : When Street Fighter 2 was released in the arcades an enormous effect on future video games followed. So many companies began producing their own renditions on it. In fact just about anything you could imagine followed. Fighting as dinosaurs, or highly obscene farters, nothing was out of the question. Some were more normal than others. They might take martial artists and give them demons to fight. They sometimes included swords. Street Fighter 2 had an impact on a genre like never before and never again repeated. Due to technology constraints Street Fighter 1 wasn't as lackluster. Capcom knew a good idea was there and Capcom being Capcom evolved their game into something greatly better. They had put a lot of thought into the new game and their thinking was in the right place as they balanced out the characters and other small but important details like the characters maneuvering. Their diversity of characters are quite remarkable. Even if one wasn't at all good to fight as they were good to fight against. Such as Ehonda. They included a blade wielding enemy, a beastly looking thing, a very skinny but far stretching character, Chun Li who could gracefully flip around, a boxer, a military man, a bear like figure, a well suited and well rounded boss, and a prime martial artist and his brother. Each brought with them a diversity of attacks. Some had a burst of power shot forth, another a lightning kick, Blanka could shock you, Ryu does a powerful uppercut, and Chun Li had a spinning kick attack. Their regular attacks were somewhat diverse such as blanka's more southeastern kick or Dhalsim's stretching ability. Special attacks through button codes were a great novelty. Anyone can attack but more skilled/practiced players could pull off special attacks. They weren't as simple as simple button pressing either, not always. Some had you roll around on the joystick that wasn't immediately able to be pulled off. Even the background of the stages were well done. You could go a bit back and forth instead of keeping it on a single screen. The player then had a little bit more room to fight. The music is excellent, and those are the reasons why the game did as well as it did. It was ported to just about every popular system at the time and you know Capcom, when they have a good idea they run with it for a long time. New versions came out, but for a long time the title retained Street Fighter 2. The next game let you fight as the bosses and that little thing alone led to great sales. A few more characters were added, things tweaked a little and the game remained strong and healthy for a long time to come.  
Mortal Kombat brought bloodshed into the game. Ed Boon and John Tobias had a more brutal inspiration such as from the movie BloodSport. In fact they wanted John Claude Van Dam to be the star of the game. Which he didn't and was replaced with Johnny Cage. Same initials and first name basically. It was at least original in its approach and probably wouldn't have done so well if it wasn't. You wouldn't call Mortal Kombat a Street Fighter 2 clone. Its controversy sold it. It did to Street Fighter 2 what South Park did to The Simpsons. It hit the news like crazy and was the biggest reason for the ESRB rating board. When ported to Nintendo the blood and murder had to be taken out. It was based on an R rated movie, only in a market still largely made up of kids, who were actually playing as the killer. However it was just given a Mature rating and was allowed to be. You can only be controversial for so long. The sensitivity of it wanes. They would make it ever more controversial but any more it isn't anything that hasn't been done before. It's much more of a game than mature matter, however. It certainly had more of a cultural impact then street fighter 2 with movies based on it doing quite well. It led to a great deal of "mature" games.  
The characters looked more realistic. Before I found out that games could use real images, this was far into the past, I wondered why after ten years the game had such great "graphics." They weren't graphics, sprite things, but filmed people. Here was an evil shape shifter to defeat. Here was a four arm monolith grabbing you with two arms and pounding you with another. It was a serious game, one that can be taken seriously, which is actually rare in fighting games. John Tobias and Ed Boon had just the right touch. Because of them we had Scorpion and his famous "get over here!" move. That's just more powerful than Guile's "Sonic Boom!" They have outlasted nearly all other fighting games. Fighting games came out in scores but most of them aren't around anymore. Mortal Kombat is.  

* **Ninja Gaiden** had the best cinematics to grace the NES. After every area they appeared and continued the story. The powerups were all useful. Some areas certainly called for certain powerups. The sound effects should be mentioned. They are some of the best out there, from the sound of striking your sword to the game over motif. The music is also very well done. The game is known as one of the most difficult of games. One of its best charms however was that everything was pattern based. The more you played the more you learned patterns and the easier the game became. Unfortunately though when you are hit you are thrown backward. As a result game overs are all too frequent when you are on a narrow ledge, especially with bird enemies around. Hits however are precise and coupled with patterns it makes you feel "good" at the game. You could even say it makes you feel like a ninja. The way you grab certain items has you striking your sword in mid air after jumping from a clif, to add to the effect. The way the game had you rush through as well. You can't sit still in the game. There are too many enemies coming at you, for one. Ninjas were a popular thing at the time, during the late 80s.  
The game lets you stick to walls and climb them.It began as a much different arcade game. That game was more beat 'em up in its approach. There are two games often said to be much better on the NES over the previous arcade version- Contra and Ninja Gaiden. It is an outstanding game based on Castlevania.  

* **Castlevania** was one of the most beloved games from the NES era. It was a game inspired by old monster movies, as was indicated by its film scrolling title screen. The main bosses are those found in old monster movies like Dracula and Frankenstien. It wasn't out of place at its time. Kids liked ghoulish things like ghoulish toys at the time. You can include Monster Squad, MadBalls, and Ghost Busters to that. A game whose main weapon is a whip- giving you a little space between you and your enemy. In fact the power up is there to lengthen it. You have Holy Water, knives, and axes if you would rather. The NES had only two action buttons but that was fixed by pressing up plus B for special weapons. You could find secret right areas by striking certain walls.  
Castlevania 2: Simon's Quest may have been a bad rendition similar to Zelda: The Adventure of Link (see the similarity in the title?) but when later games were made they were formed into a kind of Metroid game. That led to the genre "Metroidvania." My favorite genre. A favorite genre for many. You either like it or you don't. My brother doesn't like them. By the time Blood Stained: Ritual of the NIght came out, it was just about perfect. Metroid and Castlevania both had a dark setting and continue to, but the new genre has seen many varied settings. Some were outright demonic. The basis of them is very simple though they vary in execution. There are areas to gradually pass through by getting new powers. For example a super high jump ability to reach a new upper area. The new Castlevania games let you take your enemies power. You just need to defeat an enemy a number of times to either summon it or gain its ability. They may let you collect things to make into something you want, like weapons or energy restoration items. As you enter a new area the map opens up. Like in Zelda the map is found someplace per area. When you get the map you can see where you have not been yet and so are indicated where you should go. That's it in a nutshell. I would even say nothing has quite evolved like the series did.  

* **Metroid** was a little NES game inspired by the Alien movie franchise. You play in a weaponized suit and to the surprise of some players Samus was a female all along, as is seen after you beat the game. The first NES game wasn't nearly as popular as some of Nintendo's other games but that may have been just for some small reasons. For example there's no map and that makes the corridors very confusing. I think it was one of those gameboy games that proved a gameboy game could be even better than the NES version. Like Zelda: Link's Awakening. Super Metroid is a much better example of its potential. Nintendo games are so often a work of love. It wasn't how well a game did initially so much as what it could become. At the time it was their darkest game. The title screen showed dead scientists and a Metroid alien that was robbed. Samus rushes to get it, but she is unable to get it from Ridley, who has taken it to Zebes. She then goes there to retrieve it from Ridley and that's where the game is set. She leaves her ship and finds a ball morph powerup nearby. She gets it and a camera scans her up and down- she's seen by her enemies dwelling on Zebes. The enemies in the game were monstrous. As far as I know it was the first of its kind. They filled more than one screen. They had a kind of screech to their voice, and by the time you get to Mother Brain you are left feeling the true evil is right before you. It's a brain in a glass. She seems vulnerable. It had taken so much just to reach her. She has tech that protects her in her resting place. You break through her protection. It doesn't seem all that difficult. Maybe that is why she had so much protection. Then she becomes her full form though and is almost totally undefeatable were it not for a Metroid. That Metroid thought Samus was its mother. Mother Brain has her energy drained by the Metroid but she comes back from it, then Samus continues attacking her making her head fling backward. Once she defeats Mother Brain she is rushed into getting back to her ship as a timer counts down. That sure is time taken to make both a great beginning and a great ending!  
As for the powerups of Super Metroid they all had their place. They were hidden in good ways. I especially liked when you morphed into a ball while on a statue's hand. It came to life and brought you to a power up. All of the statues before didn't do that. Yet one statue came to life and attacked you. There were bombs, super bombs. There was a freezing beam to turn enemies to ice and make them into platforms. There was a ray to aid in seeing secrets. There were suits that let you go into the lava and they were all very fun to get and use. I found out recently that if you don't need a missile or energy up item then the enemies don't drop them. They just drop things you aren't totally full on. It is a masterpiece in Nintendo's catalogue.  

* **Mario Kart and some other racing games** : I wonder what the first great racing game was. Whatever it was, it wasn't nearly as good as Mario Kart. Rock and Roll racing was great. Spy Hunter was among the best racing games on the NES. They both let you have little powers against the other vehicles. Spy Hunter had a helicopter against you. Marble Madness was a racing game with a marble. Top Gear was nice for its nighttime lights. Some had it overhead, Excite Bike scrolled. Racing games were simple overall. FZero stood out. It put the energy idea into a racing game. You got more along the track on certain spots. It felt super fast, and used Mode 7 very well. As far as racing games go though, Mario Kart did to racing games what Super Mario Bros did to side scrollers. The Mushroom Kingdom worked well into a game, from the twomps of Bowser's castles to the ghost houses of Super Mario World (Dinosaur Land, technically.) In the past you may have had three racers to choose from. The balance of them was simple. Once fast, one slow but more sturdy, and one somewhere in between. Mario Kart had that idea too from Toad to Donkey Kong. However some racers were more likely to get a certain powerup. Depending on who you were racing as you had a particular racer to beat. Instead of a car of a different color you had a focus on the character over the vehicle, with many to choose from. Non racers in the game included the Lakatu which would pull you out of a pit and had the starting lights, moles in the way as first seen in Super Mario World, and twomps.     The items to use against other racers was perhaps its best feature. You can't have a game that doesn't have bad ones making the rest much more preferred, such as the banana peel and the feather. Then again the feather could help you in battle mode. The red shell was best of all. It was like a honing weapon. If any racer got the lightning bolt you would know it, as all of the players are suddenly shrunk. And you liked being that racer! The mushroom was made into the common dash forward things found in many racing games. The banana peel served as the oil slick.  
It made a track more than a road. The tracks in Mario Kart were a true splash of color. It led to many imitators but "there is no honor among imitators" and that is especially true with Mario Kart. Anyone can make a new Mario game and get away with it- like Adventure Island or something. But when you have famous characters from a series racing on carts, the imitation of it is quite obvious.  

* **Why they have succeeded overall**: They were inventive. They didn't follow rules that said things should be realistic. They instead cast a whole world into a good and identifiable setting. They kept out things that were out of place. They took any given idea and added well unto it. In the silent area of video games music had to be well done. The games depended a lot on their music, for better or worse. These were adventures on a TV screen in an awesome setting. The game could be depended on- to have mechanics that weren't unmanageable, or totally unfair elements. Instead of being lost in the start as with so many bad games, the game gave a helping hand. They were well enough understood at the start. They had their own personality. Players greeted that with charm. The land may be amusing, or compelling, or engaging/ interesting. It wasn't just a hosh posh of levels but something put together with thought. They'd even tested the game often to make sure things were as good as they could be. They didn't leave problems there. They fixed them. It wasn't done out of labor but of love. They took the time to find good ideas and were probably experienced at it. They were the work of creative minds. They were geniuses in their profession. Just as much as Bach isn't Mozart who isn't Beethoven, they stood out as different and even revolutionary with what they did.  

## Two Player Elements in Different Games:  
  
1. **In a platforming game** : These have been very bland before such as simply taking turns. Super Mario Bros was that way but when 3 came out they had an original Mario Bros game added to make a two player game better. That little addition added a lot to the 2 player game. Another point can be added to that that there is 2 player gameplay absent from the one player game. The two player element can add a lot more possibilities. These have just been recently explored, things like racing to the end of the level to get their first. Online gaming has allowed for many players at once doing so while blocking others along the way or throwing a thing behind you to make the other player lose. In some games if you kill an enemy it gets thrown into the other player's game.  
2. **In a beat em up** : The joy of a two player game is at its best in a beat em up. It is well suited for the genre. Each player hopes the other lasts long enough to help them at the end of the game. They may, they may not. The player is informed how many attacks they got in, and so given points, which proves which player did better. It just makes you try to do your best. Who gets to the energy increasing item depends on who gets to it first. The same goes for enemy dropping weapons or one just laying in the street. The game may be very difficult to begin with but the two player incentive makes it easier. Sometimes the character can attack the other, to their annoyance. Double Dragon lets you turn that feature on or off. One character guards one spot while the other takes care of the other side of the screen. More cowardly players will make the other player beat up the harder enemies or just kind of pretend to be fighting in order to reserve their energy.  
3. **On a single screen** : A lot of fun can be had on one screen! Whether it is Combat for the Atari or a favorite card game like Skip-Bo. In Combat you just ran around in a tank trying to shoot the other tank. The first game to come out really was Pong, a tennis-like game of such simplicity. Even puzzle games like Tetris have been made for two players.  
4. **In a racing game** : Make it to the top three to win. Even if you are behind you have a second chance as later tracks give you more points. There is a side game where you can battle one on one, on a field instead of the track. Battle modes, they are called, where you see a split screen of the other player to know where they are hiding. It was a much better purpose for the feather item in Mario kart. Within the game are special items to use against the other players from oil slicks to banana pills. Games before Mario Kart had different drivers and cars to choose from but it was a great deal more shallow. One could go faster but had less control over the vehicle, things as simple as that. Mario Kart is a game often imitated but never outdone. In a motorcycle game one player tries to bump into another just well enough to crash them out but not crash themselves. One annoying player may maneuver in front of the other player so they can't pass. Their nitro bursts must be reserved. Some games have a pit spot which hopefully you don't need. Some racing games let you control one car with two different players. Maybe in two player racing games you should be able to switch cars with any other player using a special item.  
5. **In a fighting game** : Who hasn't been cheated by a player spamming jump attacks in them? Does the player have just the right choice of fighter according to their tastes? Diversity helps. It gives the player just what they want. For women to have female characters, a person to have whatever character uniquely suiting them. A balance has always been important in making a good fighting game. That is, with any given player you don't have a handicap over any other. Fighting games really are fighting games. No other game makes you quite as mad when you lose against your friend.  
6. **In a FPS** : What are the locations you want to have in the game? Does it have spots to hide or large corridors to sneak around? Does the player have the chance to escape if they have to? Does the game itself not take too long or too short a time to win? The last one dead wins. Knowledge goes a long way such as where that special gun is hidden. A wide amount of different areas is always a good thing, areas either chosen by the players or random, maybe only able to be chosen by the winner. If you hide then your energy may gradually increase. Then the other player really wants to hunt you down.  
7. **In some of the others** : Such as vertical shooters and board/card games. Clubhouse games had just about everything you could want. Whatever they couldn't include because of trademarks they just made in generic form. They called it something else and gave it a somewhat different look. Some sports games translate well into video games better than others, naturally. Some just needed a technology boost to be really good, such as American Football. Among all the 2 player sport games wrestling is among the best of them. One move grapples, tag the other player if you need (whether in a 2 player game against the computer or a four human player game) thrown out of the ring too long and you lose. Pin your opponent down after weakening them enough, then you win. Each wrestler has a special attack, pounce your character from a corner pole, and use a chair as a weapon- what a perfect two player sports game! There are sports games too that are perhaps just too simple and shouldn't be bothered with, such as pool. The entirety of the game is just hitting at the right angle and even Pong has better gameplay than that. Tennis, in fact, goes very well into a two player sports game. Mario Party was great fun! That is a perfect example of a board game for the video game world.  
8. **When the computer is the other player.** I remember reading Nintendo Power at one time when a person wrote about Mario Kart and was angry with it. He said that the computer is just too unfairly better. However good the computer is, human players have generally been able to outsmart them. A super chess game could be made and would be a good way to get better at the game. AI more recently has become very difficult to beat in the game, even by the best players in the world. The smartest AI has its place, which is sometimes not its place. The player can choose a difficulty- from amatuer to master. I played an RPG recently that I really didn't like. I won't name it because I like the company who made it. It had this awful design that even on the easiest level your enemy would keep you just barely able to survive, yet you did. The enemy themselves had a ridiculously high HP level. In effect you can surely win... in about an hour of fighting, you are fully able to win, it just takes a loooong time. Cure yourself twice, attack once and rinse and repeat a thousand times. It goes to show you that enemy AI can border on the offensive. Before video games all we had was solitaire to play a game without another human person. Even though they aren't real people you are interacting with you just kind of go with the flow. Movies are no more real, nor books, and the same is true with video games- people are good at pretending. If our siblings don't want to play a board game or a card game then there are always video games to turn to. Games like Uno and Monopoly already have the whole design worked out. They have touches that the board games don't have, such as certain visuals. No one can cheat at them while playing. In my experience the AI has been perfectly fine in those kinds of games. Then there are game show games like Wheel of Fortune which are just pulled off better than a board game of it would.  

## Choosing a system to create a game for  

There are many to choose from and software is being created all the time to make it all easier. For a while systems were outdated. People only looked toward the new. Recently though in large numbers people have been returning to old systems. These people can be easily seen online promoting their new game. Some are all new games. Others are hacks. Some are remakes. The hacks just rearrange things in an old game, in case you didn't know. Chip boards are available for certain systems right now and hopefully availability increases as well as the number of systems for them. That itself isn't too difficult. The ROM is made, tested in an emulator, and the eprom soldered in. As for boxes and manuals, those can be printed by yourself or mass printed online. There is a lot of help available.  
People are making games for a wide variety of systems. Even the Atari Lynx. New hardware for old systems are being made in mass amounts and sold online like NES clones. Old systems and handhelds are being fixed more and more. New life is being breathed into retro gaming. So if it is an old system you are creating a game for you will be most welcomed. You may even have a product on your hands to sell if you can build up enough hype in the gaming community. In fact systems that failed badly in their time are finally starting to get attention.    

## History and facts about old consoles  

How to go about making a game- first, which system will you choose? Games come in many forms. Consoles do too. The old consoles are the game maker's junk yard and people are always restoring old systems. Base your console on what you want to create and be a part of. Here is a dictionary of consoles and portables. I will go over them and provide useful information for them. Note: when I say "deserves a sequel" I mean on its own system.  

* **The Atari 2600** : Original release 1977. Created by Atari. Uses 6502 Assembly language. Although the Atari hardware was very modest it was capable of fun games like Space Invaders and Frogger. The Atari 2600 wasn't the first console but was the first to bring video games into the household and set forth its market. Just any game could be made for it which crashed the market it created. It was a very long lasting console going on until 1992. Modernly it is recreated as a plug and play system with several games inside it. What it lacks is better arcade ports. Pac Man for it was shameful. Also, it had too many low quality games. Those games could be taken up and made better. While it is not as powerful as its contemporary the Colecovision, many of these games were rushed and poorly made to begin with such as ET.  

* **The Atari 5200** : Original release 1982. Created by Atari. Uses 6502 Assembly language. The controller for it is a joystick with a number pad beneath that, two action buttons, and a start, pause, and reset button. It was only on the market for a couple of years. It had a controller known to break easily but there are adapters for it that let you use gamepads from other systems. If you want to program for a system just a little more powerful than the Atari 2600 then the 5200 is a good place to go, and you won't have a lot of competition.  

* **The C64** : Original release 1982. Created by Commodore. Program with BASIC. It was a popular computer of its time especially in some areas. It used a joystick with two action buttons. It also had a keyboard. It was limited to 16 colors. The system used both floppy disks and cassette drives. As a computer it had printing, ram expansion, eprom programmers, and hard drives available for it. Making games for it is a cheap affair due to the low price of floppy disks. The C64 was a long lasting system that lasted until 1994. A mini C64 system was recently created and sold, which is much smaller and had games built into it.  

* **The Intellivision** : Original release 1979. Created by Mattel. Program with Assembly. Its controller is a twelve numbered button pad with a multi directional disk below. It had an expansion device that allowed Atari 2600 games on it.  

* **The NES** : Original release 1983. Created by Nintendo. Program with 6502 Assembly. It had the Power Pad, Four Score, ROB, The Zapper, Roll 'n Rocker, Power Glove, and Super Chair. The original version from Japan, The Famicom, had a disk system that played floppy disk games. They are capable of much better sound as found in its Zelda game. It is a system near and dear to many gamers' hearts. The NES Maker has made it easier to make games for the NES thanks to the NES Game Maker software which doesn't require any coding knowledge. Titles that deserve a sequel include Crystalis, Blaster Master, Bionic Commando 2, 8 Eyes, Rygar, Monster in My Pocket, Gremlins 2 (which wasn't a sequel but for the movie), Kid Icarus, Metroid, Adventures of Bayou Billy, The Legend of Kage, Spy Hunter, and Doki Doki Panic. They are at least good inspiration for a spiritual successor. The NES is perhaps the most cloned system. As such new NES consoles are not hard to come by. The game shells and circuit boards are easily found online. All that they need is a programmed eprom to solder in. The VCR design was just to make a system not look like a video game system, hence the name "entertainment system" since the market was in shambles at the time. Unfortunately that led to bent pins, a thing that seemingly every console succumbed to. That was rectified with its model two however, which was a top loader. The gamepads for those are really neat as well, shaped like a dog bone and more comfortable. There are far many more choices these days for an NES system, from clones to mini consoles loaded with games. Emulators are especially well developed for it.  

* **The SNES** : Original release 1990. Created by Nintendo. Program with 65c816 Assembly. Known for its famous Mode 7 for producing a pseudo-3D effect on its modest hardware. Mode 7 has been given better sharper detail thanks to the HD Mode 7 patch. Later games used an FX chip to produce 3D games. It's controller has more buttons than others of its time. There is a mouse peripheral for it. There is a light gun (bazooka) peripheral for it. There is a peripheral for it that can play Game Boy games. It also has a multi tap to allow for four player games. SNES games deserving a sequel include: F Zero, The 7th Saga, DOOM, Super Ghouls and Ghosts, Pilotwings, Chrono Trigger, Super Play Action Football, Killer Instinct, Sim Earth, Super Metroid, Tiny Toons Adventures: Buster Busts Loose!, Populus, Rock 'n Roll Racing, Ys 3: Wanderers from Ys, and Lagoon. Super Mario World, Super Mario All Stars, Donkey Kong Country, Super Mario Kart, and Street Fighter 2: The World Warrior, were its top selling games. What the system lacked: compared to the Genesis it needed more sports games. It had more than enough RPGs and fighting games. The potential of the FX chip could bring in more shooting games. Overall however the system is robust with a variety of good games. Although simulation games on it were well received there are not many of them.  

* **The Genesis** : Original release 1988. Created by SEGA. Program with C. The Genesis had a chip comparable to the SNES FX chip called The Virtua Processor. There are two light guns for it, the Konami Justifier and The Menacer. It had a mouse peripheral as well. It had the Sega CD as an add on, a cart based enhancement called the 32 X. It also had an adapter that let you play Master System games. With the Street Fighter 2 craze it was necessary for them to create a six button controller. Games on the system that deserve a sequel include:  Castlevania Bloodlines, Comix Zone, The Immortal, Joe and Mac, Jungle Strike, Populus, Dragon's Revenge, and Sword of Vermillion. Its best selling games were: Sonic The Hedgehog, Sonic The Hedgehog 2, Disney's Aladdin, Sonic The Hedgehog 3, and NBA Jam. Games that it needed/lacked: even though it had some good RPG games there weren't very many of them. Compared to the SNES there is a large deficit there. A good metroidvania game would be a good addition to its library. Only one game was made for its virtua processor. Many of its arcade ports were of poor quality, even unacceptably so. In a time when gaming was considered childish SEGA focused on the adult part of the market. Genesis was known for its sports game library. They did not have Mortal Kombat censored. Although the Mortal Kombat on the SNES was much better graphically it turned blood into sweat and fatalities were distorted into regular attacks. The Sega Genesis created a fan base at the time while only Nintendo had the other. For one most people could only afford one or the other. And the system was marketed for "cooler people." The SNES is more powerful overall but the Mega Drive has a faster CPU. That was labeled in marketing as "blast processing."  

* **The Turbografx 16** : Original release 1987. It lasted seven years, until 1994. Created by NEC. Program with HuC6280. It is known for good shoot 'em ups and its HuCards that are as small as a thick credit card. It had a multitap for four players and a CD add-on. Due to the HuCards it may be difficult to make physical games for it currently, but the CD should prove easier. After Burner 2 could have a good sequel, and Battle Lode Runner, Devil's Crush, Golden Axe, Keith Courage in Alpha Lands, Pac Land, Sim Earth, and Splatter House. The controller was highly regular with two action buttons and a more disk-like D pad. The thing that made it different was that it had turbo buttons. There is a portable Turbografx 16 called the Turbo Express.  

* **The Atari Lynx** : Original release 1989. Created by Atari. Program with Assembly. It was Atari's answer to the gameboy. It allowed for both right and left hand playing by flipping it over. It also allowed for vertical games. It used 6 AA batteries which didn't last long and that limited its portability. It also cost a lot more than the gameboy and for those reasons wasn't as successful. Lower quality of games and not having the Nintendo brand added to that. It did have some good games however. Lemmings, Shadow of the Beast, Xenophobe, Desert Strike, Ninja Gaiden 3, Rygar, Pac Land, Rampart, Road Blasters, were all very good games. There are a fair amount of homebrew games that have been made for it.  

* **The Game Boy** : Original release 1989. Created by Nintendo. Program with any language that compiles to ARM Assembly. The Gameboy did well over its composition for its longer battery life and the quality of games brought to it. On its modest hardware came some great games. The Super Gameboy allowed its games to be played on TV through the SNES. Its screen was not backlit. As a result magnification and light peripherals were made for it. Modern mods allow for back lit screens. Those differ, some of them are even EL lit. It had a four player adapter and even a sonar peripheral. Games on it that deserve a sequel include: Kid Icarus, Metroid 2, and Ninja Gaiden Shadow. It's best selling games were: Tetris, Pokemon Red, Green, and Blue, Pokemon Silver, Super Mario Land, Pokemon Yellow, Super Mario Land 2: Six Golden Coins, Pokemon Crystal, Dr. Mario, Pokemon Pinball, and Wario Land: Super Mario Land 3. What the system lacks: the system certainly lacks RPG games. While there are a few and they are fine as games they don't live up to the system's potential. It does have Pokemon but nothing of the grandeur of a traditional RPG. The Final Fantasy games for it were not actually Final Fantasy but a part of the Mana series, just renamed. A metroidvania game would be a nice addition to its library and judging how well done Metroid 2 was it is certainly possible. It was a system that lasted until 2003 thanks to some reiterations such as color graphics. Pokemon too, which breathed a lot of new life into it. Software is available to help anyone who wants to make a game for it, such as GB Studio.  

* **The Game Gear** : Original release date 1990. Created by SEGA. Program with Z80 Assembly. It had two buttons and a color back lit screen. The back lit screen used a florescent bulb. Usually when people fix it they are fixing the caps. There are kits available online to do so. People sometimes put more modern back lit screens on it through a kit available online as well. It is basically a portable master system as far as hardware goes. There was a Master System peripheral made for it used to play Master System games. The main complaint made for it was that it drained batteries too quickly, lowering its portability. Sega released some mini Game Gears more recently. A more accurate word for them is "tiny." They each had a few games in them.  

* **The Neo Geo** : Original release date 1990. Created by SNK. Program with 68k Assembly. The Neo Geo was basically a home console arcade machine. The games were like part of an arcade board. As a result they were very large and the system was very powerful. The controller was a typical arcade one over a gamepad. It was home to some perfect arcade conversions of Samurai Shodown and Art of Fighting. Hardware lasted until 1997 but software production for it continued until 2004.  

* **The Neo Geo Pocket** : Original release date 1998. Created by NEC. It is a good looking handheld and considered by many to be a hidden gem among systems. The Neo Geo Pocket Color came out in 1999. These lasted until 2001. SNK brought their Metal Slug, King of Fighters,  and Samurai Showdown games to it. It's library of games was mostly made up of fighting games. It doesn't have very many RPG games.  

* **The 3DO** : Original release date 1993. Created by Panasonic. It was discontinued in 1996. The 3DO was unique in that the specifications were licenced out for any hardware maker to create their own. Time Magazine called it "The Product of the Year." It looked promising but high prices and lack of good games prevented its success. The 3D0 was a 32 bit system with CDs as games, something remarkable at the time but also costly. It does have enough good games to make it worth considering.  

* **The CDi** : Original release date 1991. Created by Philips. After Nintendo backed down on their deal with Sony to create a CD add-on for the SNES, they went to Phillips and did the same thing. They had to find a way out of their deal and offered up their franchises to make a few games from. They made some Mario and Zelda games then which were considered horrible. It wasn't meant to be a gaming machine so much as an interactive player. The whole name of the system is "CDi interactive player." The controller itself was more like a remote control. They had other controllers for it but they were simple three action button pads. Since it is CD based it is at least easy to make a physical game for it if the programming hurdle can be jumped over. If you make a good game for it you'll be among the few that have. If you make a really good game for it you will be the only one that did. The CDi lasted until 1996.  

* **Sega CD** : Original release date 1991. Created by SEGA. Program with Assembly. Sega wanted to expand the lifespan of their system by making this an add on the Mega Drive. Its fault is that so many games were rushed and that key franchises for it were no shows. More than that the games were not much better than the ones already on the Genesis. Some only added better music and didn't use the technology more than that. They made an ugly Frankenstien with the Sega CD and 32X. The 32X was an add on for the cart port. Sega must have had a fetish for add ons because they made a cart on top of a cart game as well (Sonic and Knuckles.) If there is anything historically significant to it it is that it had Night Trap, one of the two games that lead to the ESRB rating board.  

* **Sega Saturn** : Original release date 1994. It lasted until 2000 and then was discontinued. Created by SEGA. Program with plain C. The controller for it is a very good one, just a step above the Genesis gamepad. There is also a "3D" controller for it. The 3D controller is round with an added thumbstick. It has a light gun and a 6 player multitap. It is a system known to be a difficult system to program for. The Sega Saturn is considered very difficult to program for. NiGHTS into Dreams, out of this world, Virtua Cop, Grandia, Street Fighter Alpha 2 and 3, Shining Force 3, Duke Nukem 3D, Resident Evil, Radiant Silvergun, Virtua Fighter, Sega Rally Championship, and NiGHTS into Dreams are among its best titles.  

* **Sega DreamCast** : Original release date 1998. Created by SEGA. Program with C or C++. The Sega Dreamcast was Sega's last effort at staying in the gaming market. Although it failed it is considered by many a great system that deserved better. It's controller had a port for an LCD based memory card that could do other things LCD based. It had a fishing controller, keyboard and mouse peripheral, and a light gun.  

* **DOS/PC** : First DOS system 1981. DOS was created by Tim Paterson. Uses EXE files that have a large amount of game making software for it. However, you can use a PC to make and compile whatever game you want. Of them I would recommend "Game Maker" the most. Ironically because of emulators just about any console game can be played on PC. Really it is the console of all consoles. It just depends on the hardware you have in it. The better the hardware the more advanced the game it can play. If you want to make copies of your game then the hardware itself can do so in a number of ways, from floppy to disk or just kept as files for emulators.  

* **The Gameboy Advance** : Original release date 2001. Created by Nintendo. Program with anything that compiles to Arm  Assembly. Just like the gameboy brought Nintendo games to it the GBA brough SNES games to it. NES games too, a large number of them in the "NES classics" series. The gap between them was even lower. In a way the GBA expanded the life of the SNES, or at least what SNES games were made of. It was like "now take that and have it portable." People were in the days of the N64 and Gamecube. Thanks to the GBA the games and style of the SNES went on a little longer. Some games on that platform were redone better. Some were done a lot better such as Metroid Zero Mission, a remake of the original Metroid. The original GBA lacked a back lit screen. The SP brand of GBA had one, and one yet better in a later model. The GBA also had a mirco version which didn't sell as well and was quickly discontinued. The GBA could hook up to the GameCube for special features, most notably The Legend of Zelda: Four Swords Adventure. The GameCube allows you to play GBA games on TV.  

* **Nintendo 64** : Original release date 1996. Created by Nintendo. Program with C. It had a jumper pack to increase power, a rumble pack for controller vibration, a short lived disk drive, a mouse and a keyboard. The controller was innovative but didn't age well as other companies took the same concept and did it much better. It had a bit of Atari Syndrome when it came to rushed games and new found 3D programming. It was the beginning of something new and SuperMan was the Nintendo 64s ET game. Donkey Kong 64, Body Harvest, Doom 64, EarthWorm 3D, Excitebike 64, F Zero X, Gauntlet Legends, Resident Evil 2, Star Fox 64, Super Mario 64, could all have good sequels or at least began as a good idea not done well enough. The system lacked RPG games for sure. There were nearly none, and none were good. Its best selling games were: Mario 64, Mario Kart 64, Golden Eye: 007, The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time, and Super Smash Bros.  

* **Sony Playstation** : Original release date 1994. Created by Sony. Program with C. By using CDs the Playstation could store more data than a cart based game could. While it was 32 bit compared to The Nintendo 64 the 64's use of carts limited space. However, the playstation's limitations called for pre rendered graphics. For example it was one room at a time instead of them winding around and in a flowing succession. Nintendo had a deal with Sony to create a CD add on for the Super Nintendo but Nintendo backed out of the deal midway and instead of dropping everything they were working on Sony took their plans and created the Playstation. As disks are cheap to come by, making games for the playstation doesn't cost as much as a cartridge would. Sony has a patent on its bios however that restricts the legality of its emulators.  

* **Sega Mastersystem** : Original release date 1984. Created by SEGA. Program with Z80 Assembly. The Master System is an 8 bit machine like the NES but it is a little more powerful. Some games were in 3D that used 3D glasses. There were arcade sticks, paddle controllers, and a light gun for it. It was not region locked. You can play any game made for it despite its national origin. It was a system most successful in Japan, Europe, and Brazil. The controller had two action buttons.  

* **The Colecovision** : From 1983. Created by Colico. Uses Z80 programming language. Among the Atari 2600 and the Intellivision, the Colecovision was the most powerful. The controller for it had a number pad like the Intellivision but instead of a disk like control scheme it had a paddle. Inserts were placed into the number pad to specifically know how they functioned.  

* **The Atari Jaguar** : Released in 1993. Created by Atari. Uses a form of Assembly. Was questionably a 64 bit machine but most would agree that it is more of a 64 bit machine split into two. Its controller had a number pad that used inserts to show their functions. There were three action buttons above that. It had a redesigned controller with 6 action buttons as well. It had a multi tap for more players. It also had a CD add-on for dsk games instead of cart games.  

* **Other hardware :**  

  * **Plug and play** : What once took a whole arcade board to play can now be played (by the thousands and thousands more) in the arcade stick by itself. Their most appealing thing is their simplicity- of both the game and the simple plug in to play design. Since they are low hardware and usually very old games the price is another nice element to them. Some systems are reduced in size by people and placed in things like one of its game carts. A nintendo system in an NES cart for example. That is sometimes just an emulator in a little computer with ROMS inside. Mini computers like the Arduino and Raspberry Pi make it possible.  

  * **LCD games** : When a cheap thing is wanted to be made they are often the first to turn to. Many of them are shameful in fact. Some are actually good games however. Nintendo's Game and Watch series were a good set of fun and enjoyable games- were LCD games done right. Then there is the Tiger fiasco. They only sold well thanks to low prices and licensed brands. As a kid I had a Zelda game watch. That was literally a watch with Zelda to play on it. I didn't get very far- to tell you a story, later in life I thought there probably was no level 2 to begin with but an online video taught me there were a few levels on the thing. LCD games depend on what you are trying to do. Gambling and card games are ideal for it. Like poker and slot machines. Some board games are done well in LCD games, others not. Naturally you can't expect to pull off something grand but you can produce fun little games on them that are inexpensive. I don't see a big future for them though. Little screens- real screens with real graphics, are so cheap and easy to work with anymore that they will probably replace them. For example a little handheld of the game Organ Trail as well as a number of old games going that route.  

  * **Mini Arcades** : These are neat little devices. I should mention the larger arcade games that have become affordable too. The "1up" brand, though not entirely the same size, is a little smaller, but still quite nice to play. Those are more cheaply made now, after all, so it is natural that they become affordable. The thinner screens alone have greatly reduced both shipping and production costs. Then we have these little arcade machines you find pac man on, and of course Tetris which is on everything. Seeing a picture on it may seem way too small unless you play it. It's surprising how well you can play a game on a 2 inch screen.  

Creating hacks for old systems is when an old game is taken and the contents of it are modified and rearranged. Software makes this easy. The software shows all of the contents of the game and those can be drawn on or adjusted.  

There is software available for certain systems that require no programming knowledge. As popular as they are I predict that more and more will become available. It has never been easier to make games for these systems thanks to online resources. Whether you are looking for carts, circuit boards, or self designed packaging, you can find them online.  

*If you ever stop to think that you are making games for a system people abandoned a long time ago, don't worry. There are people who are always returning to things of old and always will. There will always be people making new cords, light guns that can work on modern TVs, selling clone systems, and bringing back the things of the past!*  

## Neat Game Things  

* *Parallax Scrolling* is when the background moves at different speeds giving you a feeling of distance.  

* *Pre Rendered Graphics* The best way to boost graphics yet the most efficient.  

* *Digital images in a game* such as how Mortal Kombat used real images of its characters. Or when Final Fantasy 8 contained them.  

* *Additional Chips* Made 3D possible on the SNES with the FX chip and is the reason why later made cart games can do more.  

* *Save Batteries*   was introduced with The Legend of Zelda. These batteries can last over 15 years. Even after they die they can be easily replaced. In fact that is probably the easiest modding thing that can be done. Oh I remember how they would die out though. At least with my copy of Super Mario World. At first I blamed my siblings for deleting my files or at least suspected them for it. So I locked it up in a little safe I had but when I came back to it the same thing happened. All of the files were gone. Those batteries are said to last about 15 years which really is quite amazing but for whatever reason mine died much earlier than that. Fortunately putting in a new battery is the most rudimentary of game fixes. You only need a safety screw driver, a very available battery, and a little prying.  

* *Mode 7/Sprite Scaling*  Put the SNES way ahead of its 16 bit competitors. Mode 7 has been made even better and sharper thanks to a certain emulator patch. Super scaller games have a 3D quality that real 3D doesn't. That was 3D in a non polygon time. They can say it isn't real 3D but then what is really? I think 3D is 3D. I never understood why it has to be polygonal to be real 3D. What about the 3D that some Sega Master System games had (complete with 3D glasses and actually considered to be of good effect)?  

* *System Add Ons* can give a system the boost they need. A smart person sees it as a sign to stay away however, as they always fail. They seem to always fail. They wind up producing just a few games for them which never catch on. There was the Nintendo 64 disk drive, the Sega 32x, there was added power from some attached thing that may have just had a few games made for it. The SNES disk drive was dropped before it could even get off the ground. In fact that wasn't only a failure but led to the Sony Playstation, as it was Sony's hardware Nintendo had agreed to have them work on for the SNES.  

* *In cart features* : For example a rumble device inside a portable game or a wi fi router within a cart. Some had motion detection implemented in them.  

* *Peripherals* : When the game you are making calls for something other than a gamepad, a new or old peripheral is used. Some catch on, others don't. Some are rip offs and under perform, very noticeably, while others some gamers can't do without.Say whatever you want about the Power Glove (it's so bad) but someone recently beat Ninja Gaiden with it. It took a hell of a lot longer than any speed runner but was good entertainment. There was a time when gamers could so much more easily be fooled. These old trash peripherals pulled in money and deceived gamers just fine. There wasn't the internet. We couldn't watch reviews really except in magazines in which these things were sponsored. Nowadays they would be laughed out of house and home. The Game Genie though, that was  like gold to the gamers eyes when it came out. It is true what Nintendo said about them in a famous lawsuit though, that "it ruins games." My game boy game genie ruined Link's Awakening for me. Here I had this game suddenly without any challenge at all.  

* *Controllers* : Marble Madness was a game that couldn't do without a trackball controller (as in its arcade incarnation.) No modern or typical controller would do for  that game. A track ball was ideal for it. People say the same about an arcade stick and fighting games. The movement in them is better done with those. Controllers are a thing of their time. You could say a gamepad was revolutionary as compared to old Atari game controllers- but not really, they never were revolutionary for the Atari. Their old controllers are still best for their games. Some count sheep at night. I count controllers. It's a good way to fall asleep thinking about each and everyone you can. Seeing what the new controller will be when that time comes is a thing of interest for all gamers. There's just no guessing. Going back to the SNES- we may have thought the controller added a few buttons. It did a lot more than just that. It made button placement different and added L and R buttons in a more curvy design. Sega went with one more button over the NES. They at least weren't so flat. The N64 came out with this monstrosity. Maybe the most unpredictable of all time was the motion control Wii controller.  
How about them third  party controllers? Yes so many of them are so inferior but sometimes they do make something better than the original.  

* *Roms and emulators* : One day I ran across a Super Mario Bros game online. This was way back when the internet was still basically new. Couldn't get the game to play though. I didn't know anything about roms and emulators. I actually tried opening the rom file without an emulator. So I looked for another game and deleted the file thinking it was a virus. Then found a game that said with the sub context it needs an emulator to play. I guess I figured things out well enough by looking through other information online. I was still somewhat new to computers and the internet itself but that one last trivial thing I needed to do was open the rom from the emulator under the file menu and right before my eyes a game started up. A game I wanted to play for years and years. And the rush of excitement flooded in when I found that thousands of games were now accessible for me to play.  
Emulators have been made that can turn NES games into a kind of 3D form automatically, which is neat. There is another that sharpens up Mode 7 and believe me the effect is noticeably better. Who knows what sort of things future emulators could do. As it is they can input game genie codes, save anywhere during the game, can capture videos and other things. They can play more complicated games than the original hardware could as well.  

* *Collecting* : What can be more fun? It could even be said that collecting them is more fun than playing them. I might not go as far to say that but for some that is true. After all, going to a flea market or thrift store is great fun for some in itself not knowing what will be there, getting a good deal. There is more to collecting it than meets the eye. I can say it is awesome to have all those games you purely wanted in your childhood. Now that a person has an income they can be gotten. Well, to a point with how much more greatly they have been going up in value. I guess my generation doesn't collect comic books more than we do video games, not by a long shot. I personally would much rather have an old game manual than them. But prices are still fair enough. I bought a few cool games for very cheap recently. I had to get ET for Atari. That game often gains the honor of being the worst game ever made. Considering it caused the video game market to crash (at least in most part- if there was any one game that did) I couldn't pass up on owning one. That's a historical piece. That is an example of how video game collecting can be fun. The details behind the game may have personal, historical, or whatever detail behind them that makes them more than just games.  
There are collectors that want all of the games within a system. All NES games for example. There are those that want all Final Fantasy games or whatever their favorite series is. Some are treasure hunting for a good value on a highly valuable game. They could get lucky enough to find a proto type of something. It is true that some old games are worth a million dollars- some have been sold at such a price. The value of games has spiked. I have a very unusual reason for collecting old games. I make some of them into magnets- the cheaper ones I like, that I had as a kid, or that resemble nostalgia in other ways for me. For example I got a Krull atari game that although I didn't have the game as a kid I did like the movie when I was one. I did so for Ninja Gaiden Shadow as well for a more personal reason. My mother bought me that game before we all stayed over at my grandparent's house for the night. I was a kid tricked into thinking it wasn't as valuable as some dumb Skid Ro cassete tape which a teenager living with my grandma and grandpa. So after one night there it was lost. Pretty surprised to have found that game for just $20 and personally I felt it was the most important game at the time for me to buy.  
To add to it all, new games are being made for older systems in a limited run fashion and I predict that some of them will be valuable someday.  
Video game collecting goes beyond games itself, certainly. There are manuals that you can get. Action figures, toys, stickers, shirts, clothes, watches, whatever you can imagine. There are more than typical games too- there are watch games, LCD games, and some oddities here and there Not to mention controllers and systems to collect. It is a truly robust form of collecting things with a little something for everyone. So it is no wonder why it is such a hot field of collecting.  
  
## Choosing a Peripheral to create a game for  

If a new game for any given system can be made then any peripheral for that system can be used. Maybe you want to make a game for the power glove that actually works well. Maybe a new guitar hero game or maybe you even want to make an all new controller. The controller itself may not be that complex, just a third button on an NES pad. Things like that add to the market things that are sorely missing. You may even get others on board with you. I'm surprised how much time has gone by without anyone improving the most famous peripherals of all, the power glove. New technology could certainly make it work better. Maybe someday people making new Wii games won't be an uncommon thing and of course that is a one of a kind, motion sensing system. That is a console that lends well to peripherals.  

## On doing things that have never been done before 
 
A person managed to fit a fairly good Doom game in a special NES cart. No one yet has made a new Super FX SNES game as far as I know. Mode 7 on the SNES has been made sharper and the effect is noticeable. A new NES emulator has put NES games into a kind of 3D.  
As for the Super FX chip it goes to show you that consoles are a lot more capable then they seem off hand. Sega had a similar chip for the Sega Genesis/ Mega drive. Things never done before- The Virtual Boy, which could have been better! A great point can be made that just because something doesn't work as is doesn't mean it can't work at all. Of course major companies don't want to take those chances but that doesn't mean others can't. Tiger's R-Zone could have been made better. Mattel's Hyperscan, too. Some of these things were very good concepts, they just needed to be done the right way. They usually just failed because they were just cheaply made or had just a couple things wrong like lack of portability and a red screen.  
Some have lost their place though. LCD "calculator" games for example now that small screens of real graphics requiring such cheap hardware are available. In fact we are starting to see old games made handheld. A perfect example is the new Super Mario Bros Game and Watch. The Game and Watch was Nintendo's LCD game series from the 80s. This new one has the actual NES game Super Mario Bros on it. I have seen Organ Trail similarly. So sometimes using old technology doesn't make sense anymore. Sometimes it can be improved to make a bad thing good, and sometimes all new things can come about when it wasn't even thought possible.  
Some things that need to be done might only come from you. Like taking these old crappy licensed games and actually making them good. Some of them only have one flaw in fact like the mechanics, but would otherwise be a good game.  

## A Brief History of Early Video Gaming  

Independent game makers are becoming more prevalent. More and more they have the software needed to create their own games and those can range from hacks to all new games. Games like Tecmo Bowl are given a fresh coat of paint having modern NFL teams and designs. Certain 2D games are being made more challenging. Newer games are being ported to different consoles. It's been found that people still like old game styles. After all, people still like cartoons, by comparison. Things did not entirely switch to CGI cartoons, either. We can make old style games better than ever, adding depth, sprucing up the graphics just a little, having more space for a game than ever before. Old games will continue to be remade, like was excellently done with Final Fantasy 7 recently. It may be a practice that increases. Just look at how much that is being done with movies, so much more than ever. Maybe video games will undergo the same thing. Old games still sell very well as apparent with the sales of classic systems and game bundles. So a large part of future gaming is going back to the past. A lot can be said about an idea whose time has come, but what about an idea whose time has returned?  
New games will have more space than ever. The matter at hand will be keeping a game from being too convoluted. In some ways that will be easy, in other ways less so. Game makers should be cautious not to include too many features that a player doesn't want. VR and augmented reality may have its day soon. Who knows? Maybe beyond that is a Holodeck- before that, holograms. Some things just can't be predicted. Who knows what the gaming gods will produce in the future. Imagine if you were in the 80s with an NES controller in your hand and some time traveller put a new game pad in your other hand. Back then I wouldn't have even guessed that consoles would be mostly upright. I guessed and guessed what the new consoles would look like. Alas I was far off.    
The days of any innovation have passed by. It used to be a whole new frontier. A gold rush. Those smart enough to know simple code and electronics jump in the scene where computers could produce TV games. Games and electronics could be produced by small teams.  
Games that once took entire cabinets to store now fit in the thousands on a thumbnail size memory card. Emulators and Roms have led to a large retro gaming market. I remember when I first bought an emulator device. It was a plug and play system. I got it at my local mall for $40. Most of the games were crap. The thing itself seemed to be made in someone's garage. I thought Mario Bros had entered the public domain. They became more commonly known. Online stores wouldn't sell them at first. They were pirated. Their numbers became too much to fend off eventually. Now these emulator boxes and handhelds are easily gotten containing every last game of your childhood. Unfortunately, having everything at once has taken away some of the appeal of these old games and the market possible for their creators. Believe me if we couldn't play Ninja Gaiden again until Capcom re-released it, then it would sell enormously when they did. But the pirates fill the sea and steal the merchant's cargo.  
Genres were being hammered out at one time. Just at the point where you couldn't go much further with them came 3D. Cheap 3D perhaps, but still a sight to behold. I'd been astonished with Super Mario World before that. Back then leaps in graphics were truly leaps. There I was at Walmart when the SNES was on display and I lost my breath for a moment.  
The advent of controversy  
Salvation from Nintendo- The famed video game crash of 1983 led to the video game market being all but abandoned. Poor and disappointing games caused it. Here it was Christmas and ET for Atari was being released. It was a rushed game however, and with a large number of quick cash grabs trashed the market. As for ET it met its fate in a garbage dump in New Mexico, a rumor later proven to be true. Nintendo had some worthwhile success in making arcade games, most notably Donkey Kong. They wanted in the video game market. They found a challenge in doing so. Stores wanted nothing to do with video games. So Nintendo set out in trojan horse fashion to enter into the market. They had to guarantee they'd buy back any system that didn't sell- which if they didn't could have bankrupted them. They even had pixel art on the game over appealing art. They wanted to show the game for what it was. So the earliest games for their system did just that with "the black box games." Nintendo decided not to market it as a video game system at all. The trinity of that being it was called an "Entertainment" system, had a VCR design, and came bundled with Rob the Robot as though it was a toy. Next, Nintendo set forth quality control to cut out the cancer at its source: that of poor quality games flooding the market. So Nintendo made it where companies could only produce 5 games a year for their system. With that, more time would be spent on making games. Like they only had one chance, and to get it right.  
The mass appeal of Nintendo soon came to be. It permeated the lives of children in its time. Mario cartoons, movies like The Wizard, even cereal boxes and fast food places were a part of it. Nothing added to a new movie or cartoon like it did, offering Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtle games for example. Although many of these games were far below any good standard.  
Sega doing their thing trying to outdo Nintendo like everyone else. They even succeeded to some extent unlike all of the others. The Atari was 64 bit! Questionably so. Too far ahead of its time too. The two biggest reasons for a systems failure are the price of it and poor games for it. Everything else can look good on paper but without a reasonable price and good games the system will surely fail.  
Nintendo playstation- Nintendo and Sody had a pseudo-legal deal to create a CD add on for their SNES. They went back on that deal. They felt that Sony would have too much control over their Super Nintendo. They had cold feet and backed down on it. The CD add on may have done well or may not have, who knows. Sony decided to take what they had been working on and create their own system with it. That is The Playstation of course, and the rest is history. What could Nintendo do? And what made the Playstation succeed so well after they had ruled the market for over a decade? The Playstation was known to have more games. Nintendo's restrictions were no longer serving them. Back then CDs were their own good reason. CD's were popular. CD's held more space so even though Sony may have been technologically less powerful CD's and the space they allotted made up for it. A similar thing happened again with the GameCube over the PlayStation 2. DVDs were then popular. Everyone wanted a DVD player. The Playstation 2 was also a DVD player.  
Things are ever shifting. At some point graphics and space are neither problems cost wise. We will come to a time when the two don't need to be so highly advanced in new generations. Costs can only go down from there.  
So many things tried- Virtual boy, power glove, motion control, dual screens. Yet hardly any of them are any good. Some were liked for a short time, then passed. Controllers on the other hand fell nicely into the design they are today. Just not always. Some dared to go off the beaten path. Even making controllers seem upside down or requiring the second gamepad be connected via wire to the player one controller. Yet only Nintendo made controller designs that became standard. The others such as the turbografx 16 wasn't even any different than the 8 bit NES, though it was 16 bit. Sega did no more than add a third action button. They at least gave the controller a grip but when Street Fighter 2 came to home consoles they had to introduce a 6 button controller.  
The beginning of video gaming is different from other forms of entertainment. At least in some ways. Movies didn't always have CGI and special effects evolved over time. Video games similarly went from low tech to high tech. As time went on, greater power from computers allowed more. We went from Pong to Pac Man to Mario. Largely in the 16 bit area you could say things got "double good."  
The value of old games has gone up incredibly. I have a regret of buying so many in box games at an old place going out of business. This was before the prices of retro games went up so much. I had 30 or so of them that I pawned. Unfortunately I was a pawn freak, to coin a term. Some rare variations of games can make a person rich. Sometimes some highly valuable game turns up at a garage sale. The knowledge of fixing old consoles or enhancing them is easily available online. Whether it is a new battery for an old game or a new back lit gameboy screen, replacing game gear caps or installing a new 72 pin connector in an old NES. Most of these things aren't even too difficult. All new systems of old consoles are available. Some of them are two or three systems in one. Then there are ROMS and emulators. I knew about those before they were popular. I don't use them myself simply because it ruins my interest in them. I mean have everything at once and nothing is valuable anymore.  
Discovery of forgotten games- or games little known to begin with, is a new thing. There are people that find them and suddenly a went nowhere game is quite popular. Preservation of old games is tended to by some, even Tiger Electronics LCD games.  
Early systems began with Pong. Such a simple design yet so fun! A very principle about games can be made from it: with video games a little goes a long way.  
Portability of games. They began with mostly LCD based games along with gimmicks to improve their value, such as with mirrors and things, or mechanics to them. Some of them were better than others. The Game and Watch series used the technology well. Then came the gameboy. What was so appealing at the time was that it was like an NES in your hand. They used cute little carts resembling those of the NES. The choice was made to bundle Tetris with it. Kids couldn't stop playing it, nor adults. More advanced systems were released such as the Atari Lynx and the Game Gear after it. They weren't so well at being portable however, which was the point to begin with: a portable system. One that didn't burn through batteries. The Game Boy did far better than they did. Certainly another reason for it is that it had an awesome catalogue of games, including those from Nintendo such as Mario, Metroid, and Zelda. They didn't have a backlight. They had just shades of green. But people saw past those things and kept the system selling well far into the future.  
One thing leads to another. Another leads to two, and two leads to dozens more. In other words ideas just don't add one from itself but it multiplies into many other possibilities. The most basic of games are improved piece by piece until Double Dragon leads to Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Turtles in Time. From Dungeons and Dragons came modern RPGs. New technology created new possibilities, but more importantly new ideas created better games. Some ideas were just lazy and destined for the trash. Like Mario clones that made one ask "what happened to Mario? Why has a three year old painted over his world?" Video game licenses have been around for as long as games have. While we expect a movie to game thing to translate differently then say a book to a movie or a movie to a book, some were just regular games that happened to have a superhero or something in it. A lot of these people thought "that was in the movie, so we will have them here, for no real reason." But good game makers are good at making any game good. So among the upper game makers came some excellent licensed games. For example Batman on the NES, or Ducktails, and a great Gremlins 2 game on NES made by Sunsoft.  
Back then if you had a game you had to make it good, if at all possible. I remember renting games I just didn't enjoy. Imagine me trying to understand Bill and Ted's Excellent Adventure on the NES. Games followed after an Arcade factor of making the game more difficult. That and to extend the longevity of a game either due to lack of space or lack of desire for programmers to make a long game to begin with. For a while games on a system improve graphically, even greatly so by the end of its lifetime. I only need to mention Donkey Kong Country and Star Fox. Or Final Fantasy 8 compared to 7. Sega themselves had a type of FX chip, which they only used once. Parents back then would argue why their kid needed the super one when they paid so much on the former. Backwards compatibility is always a good reason to buy the new one.  
Everyone wants to do Mario, but better, or Zelda, but better. Few there are that succeed by copying others. Rather it is being different but in a better way or even the same but in a better way that will succeed. Sonic was a lot more different then Mario. Mortal Kombat was a stand out from Street Fighter 2. It takes The Beatles to overthrow Beethoven and in turn become revolutionary. People spent over a century trying to be better than Beethoven.. To be higher esteemed than him. Did it take a hundred musician orchestra ? No, not at all. It took a guitar, singer, and a drummer. Sometimes the simplest of ideas can cause the greatest change. Sometimes they can succeed where the most complicated of things could not, such as with MineCraft and Tetris. As with Galaga I just felt it was an added nuisance to have Space Invaders, only the ships were now diving down on me. When people were making Mario Nintendo was making a suck up monster named Kirby.  
  
## The Gaming Community  

It is more than just robust. It is alive and well. It makes up a large portion of YouTube. It is a part of something people really want but is still hard to find from professionally made TV shows. You might find a documentary here and there if you are lucky. You may find a modern game play through on TV from some corporate channel, but overall it is relegated to individuals and their teams making them for video sites such as YouTube. Videos about them can be widely varied. To name a few they can be top tens, reviews, glitches, play through, speed run, history of, hidden gems, personal collections, about rarity, news, and more. Especially more among top tens which aren't only top tens of the best games but far more than that. Like top tens of "most graphically impressive," these things can be quite specific.  
It is a sport we watch sometimes- esports. We have our own sport! We don't collect comic books so much as we do game manuals. In fact video games have among them an enormous amount of things to collect. Anywhere from a GameBoy fanny pack to a Castlevania wall clock. We have our own form of music- music from video games, which range from classical music to lyrical music. Opera music if we like, such as from Final Fantasy 6. It contains Stravinsky-like music, or organ music that came from a more wicked Bach. (In other words Fithos Lusec Wecos Vinosec and the castle music from Super Mario World.) If Classical music went anywhere, it was into video games.  
We have our own history to study. It isn't a boring history either. It is a history that involves us and our childhood. It reveals blunders like over priced consoles that go down into a sort of philosophy.  
If you put it into a form of religion, we congregate at the flea market, we tithe by buying a used game to add to our collection. We build shrines for the better part of our collection. We hear the praise or criticism of any game. We gather to play.  
Thrift stores selling games have gone from cheap to expensive in no time. I really thought I should have predicted that. We were poor kids mostly. Games back then just cost too much to have more than a small collection. Interestingly it has made gaming magazines from the past cost more because the internet stopped their production! We used to just throw the box away and lose the manual. It was all an interesting series of events that led to their price hikes.  
Speed runs are definitely a popular form of entertainment for us. They have gone down to just about the least possible time to beat for some games. Of course sometimes a glitch is found that changes that such as the pipe level glitch in Super Mario Bros. 3. The Super Mario World and The Legend of Zelda: A Link to the Past, allows you to "beat" the game in just a few minutes. Ninja Gaiden 2 was once thought impossible to beat without taking a hit, Even though only one hit speed runs or game plays were common enough. It was thought impossible to beat the final boss without taking a hit...  at least one. But a certain jump and slash mechanic was found to undo that problem, and the first true damageless playthrough occurred after that.  
Speedruns are done on hacked games sometimes, too. Such as "Final Fantasy 4 pre enterprise" where it is that all of the major items are shuffled. So the first treasure chest you find may hold the best item toward winning. Or A Link to the Past doing the same thing.  
Even though video games haven't been around all that long the history for it is all deep and interesting. There are the teams and their designs of the game that we hear about mostly in interviews. Some of the design ideas are kept tight secrets but in the past leaks occurred that revealed them to the public. Some of the ideas for new games are amusing to hear about when heard, such as Pac Man being inspired by a pizza minus a slice. Then there are the ghosts in Super Mario Bros 3. A guy's wife would shy away when he looked at her. We get to hear about things such as inspiration and the other thought processes behind the designers. That first game to have an easter egg too because the game publisher's wouldn't allow credits. The easter egg was a hidden room that stated his name. The first Mega Man game may have fared better if the box art for it wasn't totally rushed.  
Those that rate video games have a large number of top ten types to use. From the most ordinary one "top ten NES games," to hidden gems, best graphics, best genre, best levels, or top worst of those instead.  
I would love to see the day when I can go to a place to watch esports just as easily as any other sporting event. I would love to see esport players get paid just as much as the major athletes of other sports. I would love also to see arcades return. Maybe all they need is a gimmick. Maybe someday video game magazines will become widely produced again. I'm sure we will continue to see remade games or newly released ones, as well as newly made consoles from the past. I believe VR and augmented reality will become common someday and someday later even holodecks. People will continue taking old carts and systems, fixing them or enhancing them with modern things. I wouldn't be surprised if old games continued to increase in value. Someday even those we can still get cheap will soar in value. Game systems may be all digital someday. I can't see why not, Having a physical copy just isn't its own good enough reason when the games and system both could be cheaper. It's always interesting to see what the new system looks like when that time comes but someday it may be no more than a small brick that streams games.  
  
## The Joy of Game Making  

Be among those after a good idea. Let inspiration easily strike you. Video games are a multi talent thing- the best of all things from art to music composition, stories and so on, yet each are easier than their counterparts. Pull out that graph paper and start making the title screen. Formulate the font for it. Consider the best music for it and make it. Do all so in fun. Take it as an opportunity to contribute something great, something uniquely your own. Take your time. Take all the time you need. Think long into an idea, trying to realize it the best you can. If your heart's in it your heart will know it.  
Comparing game making to other forms of creativity, well, it includes so many within itself, from art to writing music. It is a far more recent form of creativity that wasn't possible without modern electronics. It is far more than just one of its parts. It's an imaginative process of so many different things. It's far from a song, it's a symphony. Most of all it is a result of imagination... the imagination of a whole new world with which the player occupies themself. It is the closest thing we have to creating a whole new world for someone to enjoy. Of course there are more simpler games too, many of which are remarkable games themselves. There is no inspiration quite like the game maker's. It is found in making new genres, the perfection of old ones, or mixing genres as well as possible. At any given time a great new genre may come to be which serves as a gold mine for the industry.  
It is to take your favorite parts and bring them together. A book may have a brief description of any given thing, like what a monster looks like, and that's well enough. But within the game that same thing is as alive as can be. That's truly like a book you can interact with, or a movie. It is a movie you can control. The game maker gets to decide the quest, the game maker has the opportunity to give all sorts of life to what they create. What they create is alive, not stationary, not  impersonal. They can throw in whatever they want, a board game, some gambling, fishing, personal art style, a song, you name it.  
The more games there are made the more possibilities there are. The magic of game making is the bringing together of ideas. Those ideas are more versatile and multifaceted.  
Comparing it to other creative forms: making videos for an online video website for example, doing so is far more superficial. People talk on video then upload it. Sure they can do a little research. It is an easy way to get popular, in a superficial way. People working on that may get popular for a moment. May have a long lasting hobby. Might get a few thousand subscribers. If they are lucky then they'll get a little advertising money. The competition in that area of creativity has increased greatly because of just how easy it is. That isn't that game makers can't make both video games and online videos- quite the opposite, but what they have to talk about has a lot of meat behind it- the game they have made. Me? I don't say so hypocritically. I write over producing simple videos, books that can take months to complete over a two hour online ramble.  
If painting on canvas or drawing on paper isn't exactly for you then maybe making games is. Drawing is a part of game making. If writing music and gathering a band isn't quite your thing then maybe doing so within the form of a game is. Making games is a multi faceted thing. I'd say so more than anything else is. Making a good game means being good at a number of things at once. Game makers draw from history, learning history in the process. That is, if they want to. Whatever a game maker likes can be used for making a game, in fact. If you like to draw, make a game. If you like to make a novel, make a game. If you like to write music, make a game. If you like any combination of those, make a game. If you and your friends want to make something but can't decide on a single thing you can always pull your talent out in making a game.  

## The 75 Rules of Good Games  

1. The game is an enjoyable and engaging place to be.  
2. The music is good and fits it.  
3. The graphics are suitable and create a good impression.  
4. The game is good at setting the mood it is trying to create. Whether it is an ominous setting or a joyful one, or a mix of different moods trying to be created for the player, it is effective at it.  
5. It has such awesome weapons. It has such awesome powerups.  
6. The game is up to standards. In fact it excels them.  
7. It is the first of its kind. It is such a good first of its kind that it led to many copycats.  
8. When the game is good it is good, sometimes the reasons why don't matter. Sometimes there aren't any reasons that can be found. People just like it. Some people like pineapple on their pizza. Others would never understand why. Cyan is your favorite character in Final Fantasy 6?  
9. The game rewards the effort as it should. Nothing too difficult to get isn't worth it. Easily found things are just worth less.  
10. Fighting in a fighting game feels graceful. Racing games feel like power behind the wheel. The best way any game can make you feel, have felt.  
11. A good game is not convoluted, obese, a cup over filled.  
12. Levels aren't too short or too long.  
13. No roadblocks where they aren't wanted.  
14. Pulls off what it intended to. Really hits the mark.  
15. Licensed games feel just like the movie.  
16. Gives you abilities you want to learn.  
17. Things feel like an accomplishment from one area to the next.  
18. Items aren't too difficult to control.  
19. There are a lot of nice touches.  
20. The pace is right.  
21. You are not stuck in dumb areas but have a lot of choice of where to be.  
22. Tedious things are few and far between.  
23. It has a mystery you want to uncover.  
24. Doesn't have things you would consider lame, weird, or stupid.  
25. There is a lot of substance to it or at least enough to keep it from being too plain.  
26. It has you doing more than just running around collecting things.  
27. Sometimes it is good to release a little at a time.  
28. Enemy bosses reward the player with something.  
29. The variety is phenomenal.  
30. It captures your attention and doesn't let go.  
31. Has  you focused on it until the end.  
32. Even if high scores are the only objective it does that well.  
33. Makes you say even of the greatest games of before "who cares about that anymore?"  
34. Chooses ingenuity over innovation.  
35. Knows that what works works and doesn't really care why.  
36. Uses any proven good idea without interfering with it too much.  
37. Makes even minor details good.  
38. Passes by the insignificant, lingers on the more important things.  
39. Is worth talking about with your friends. Has a way of being praised.  
40. Sends the gamer to places they didn't expect they'd go like the moon or the Dark World.  
41. Enemy patterns are easily enough understood to work with.  
42. The game is flexible. If one way doesn't do it another will.  
43. The game is suitable for different players wanting to do their own thing. It is customizable enough to put the player in a world they want to be in.  
44. The concept of the world is easily grasped.  
45. It puts neat things in the player's hand.  
46. It doesn't exaggerate anything that turns out to be a disappointment.  
47. Unless something is great it isn't added to the game.  
48. It's a great escape just as a game should be.  
49. The programmer does all they can to not include filler. Filler is always obvious, when it is that a story drags out without any good reason.  
50. The game is intuitive. Things can be figured out on a natural basis.  
51. Players are free to experiment. A little experimenting goes a long way.  
52. It lets you know what you can get but don't yet have.  
53. The advice may be a bit vague but understandable enough.  
54. Like a good movie it keeps you at the edge of your seat.  
55. It doesn't have to be realistic. In fact if it is it is too life-like.  
56. Lets  the character choose the difficulty, lets  them choose among a variety of modes to play.  
57. Every level has at least one special thing to it such as a bonus room, its own unique powerup, or secret exit and the more the better.  
58. The best thing about some games is their charm and they do well on that merit alone.  
59. Is in the best suitable genre for it. If the best execution for an idea puts it in a fighting game then that's what it is.  
60. Has a great ending.  
61. Abandoned bad ideas during its programming which hoped to work but simply never did.  
62. Focuses on what matters.  
63. Is such a new concept that gamers wonder where it was all these years. Asks the question "why hasn't that been thought of before?"  
64. Is not a game just made for salary but a loving project of interested people.  
65. Does not assume that something should be good but truly knows what is.  
66. Is a game that makes more money than all the others. Is the game that has the most video reviews on video sharing websites.  
67. Doesn't rely on gimmicks as its foundation unless that creates a great game on its own- such as Splatoon or Bomberman.  
68. Takes  any old idea but not without making it much better. Like taking a sword and making it into a lightsaber.  
69. Has been made by one of great imagination.  
70. Is a story spun just the right way.  
71. Is not full of nonsense, not moronic, not stupid seeming.  
72. Has an impressive title screen and an even greater introductory gameplay.  
73. Creates such a fanbase and to have books, movies, videos of all kinds made about it, such as the case with the greatest franchises. The world lends to a world of its own that others are always creating and trying to understand more fully.  
74. Has at least a few things in the game that stands out from the rest- that one different moment, when things truly shined.  
75. At its best, nothing is in it without its purpose.  

## The 75 Game Making Sins  

1. The game is made too difficult and unfairly so.  
2. The graphics are something to make fun of.  
3. The sound is awful and repetitious.  
4. There isn't too much to the game. It is too simple. Just a collectathon or empty game.  
5. It contains boring and tedious things.  
6. The story contains a lot of filler and pointless agendas.  
7. It is too simple to enjoy or get anything out of.  
8. It's just an ugly clone of a different game.  
9. The powerups are uninteresting overall.  
10. The game is confusing and it is easy to get lost in it. The story doesn't make sense or is hard to understand.  
11. The battle physics are too tricky and don't make sense. The player doesn't like the battle system. Other forms of battle would be much better.  
12. The platforming physics are difficult to work with. Jumping has to be too precise. Hits have to be too much on target. The effects of a weapon are unpredictable.  
13. There are enemies too annoying to tolerate. They cheap shot you and are difficult to dispatch.  
14. The game seems to go nowhere.  
15. Things are too much the same. In a beat 'em up too many are just recycled. In a racing game the tracks are pretty much the same.  
16. The game cheap shots you, makes things pixel perfect.  
17. The enemy can attack you several times while you are unable to do anything about it.  
18. Your weapons break. They have to be polished. You can only carry one. There's no inventory for others.  
19. The way through is so unobvious that you never find it, yet only a simple thing keeps you from going through a simple door.  
20. That wasn't the last battle, there are two more, and if you thought the previous one was difficult, this one's impossible!  
21. One of your characters is totally useless yet you have to use them.  
22. The game is too simple to be enjoyed. All you do is go from left to right basically.  
23. The plot seems pointless yet the story just slowly creeps forward. It feels like filler. The game spends too long on boring things.  
24. One hit and you're dead. Not only that, hits can be very unfair. If you bump into another car in a racing game you will go flying out of control.  
25. It's okay to play with just a few chords as long as you play them right, but some games are nothing but dissonance.  
26. It is plagued with glitches and bugs.  
27. It is weird, as weird as Seaman.  
28. It trolls you. Right when you thought the level was done you jump over a gap. Then oops! You hit an invisible block and fall down the pit.  
29. The game seriously needs a map but doesn't have one.  
30. It's based on a liciened movie but has nothing to do with the movie. One small thing in the movie becomes a powerup or has you collecting that thing. Other than that there is no resemblance to the movie.  
31. Save points are too far and in between. Passwords are too long and complicated.  
32. It gives you a lot, too much in fact to let you know what to use and when.  
33. The voice acting is laughable.  
34. The animation of your character is weird looking, lacking, or even makes it difficult to control your character.  
35. The enemies respawn with just a little bit of backtracking.  
36. It isn't a sequel or new kind of game the gamer wanted. Like taking a cherished RPG and making a slasher game out of it or redesigning the whole game.  
37. It expects you to collect too much, like how magic was drawn out of enemies in order to have spells in Final Fantasy 8.  
38. One weapon makes all of the others useless.  
39. The game is poorly translated, has typos in the text, some in game advice is misunderstood because of it.  
40. It makes you play mini games you don't really want to.  
41. If you press the wrong button, long dialogue will start all over again.  
42. It has systems of things that are confusing and difficult to learn.  
43. It does smart things in dumb ways. Or in dumb ways it does smart things.  
44. It has difficult things to maneuver around and if you make contact with it you'll take damage. Like the sewer level in TMNT for the NES.  
45. It just repeats things without any real difference or difference at all.  
46. The game doesn't stick with the story. It goes off into too many side quests and alternative agendas.  
47. The game collection game (multiple games in one) has too many filler games in it.  
48. You can't relate to the characters.  
49. The advice person or thing is totally annoying- as annoying as Navi.  
50. Everytime you attack there is a dumb sound effect like "Hah!" Or there are dumb sound effects or dumb talk with other things you do.  
51. The only thing that makes something a secret or a puzzle is that it is confusing to solve/ get to.  
52. Things take longer than they should. Acts have a pause to them leaving you open to attack or are just annoying.  
53. Loading screens take way too long.  
54. You get continues  but they put you on an earlier level and take away all of the items you had gotten.  
55. The story at the end is dull.  
56. The game is too easy.  
57. In two player games fighters or sport players are unbalanced. One does too much better than another just by picking him or her.  
58. You have to go all the way back to get something. Every time you need a potion or something you have to go out of your way to get it.  
59. Water is instant death.  
60. The RPG expects you to have an item to defeat a boss but makes no indication for getting it.  
61. The game limits your weapon or armor choices too much. Some can use only arrows, others can only use swords.  
62. You lose your powerup too easily.  
63. You only get by with luck instead of skill. As a result you have to repeat a lot of things just to get lucky enough to get through.  
64. It has a kind of graphical style that people just don't like.  
65. It may seem like a promising game but just fell short- that's okay, at least you have a good foundation, and better luck next time. The sin here would be giving up on it.  
66. Not spending enough time on the important things, spending too much time on the unimportant.  
67. Lack of experience, assembling a poor team, riding off of a license not used well.  
68. Being over innovative and making a strange game because of it.  
69. Not having enough inspiration to draw from.  
70. Rushing out a game could be considered among the 7 deadly sins if we are talking about game making.  
71. Not correcting mistakes you find along the way.  
72. Trying for what is "good enough" instead of what is "a total winner."  
73. Lack of: imagination, inspiration, ingenuity, and interest.  
74. Not releasing what you would call a good product.  
75. Cheating the buyer out of their money is the worst sin of game making.  
